Title: A Dynamic Knowledge Update-Driven Model with Large Language Models for Fake News Detection

URL Source: https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2025/0334.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 18 Sep 2025 12:49:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# A Dynamic Knowledge Update-Driven Model with Large Language Models for Fake News Detection 

## Di Jin 1,2 , Jun Yang 1 , Xiaobao Wang 1,∗ , Junwei Zhang 3 , Shuqi Li 1 and Dongxiao He 11Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Application, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 

> 2

## Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence Application Technology, Qinghai Minzu University, China 

> 3

## Hangzhou Institute of Medicine, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China 

## {jindi, yangjun, wangxiaobao, junwei, shuqili, hedongxiao }@tju.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

As the Internet and social media evolve rapidly, distinguishing credible news from a vast amount of complex information poses a significant chal-lenge. Due to the suddenness and instability of news events, the authenticity labels of news can potentially shift as events develop, making it cru-cial for fake news detection to obtain the latest event updates. Existing methods employ retrieval-augmented generation to fill knowledge gaps, but they suffer from issues such as insufficient credibil-ity of retrieved content and interference from noisy information. We propose a DY namic k Nowledge upd Ate-driven MO del for fake news detection (DYNAMO ), which leverages knowledge graphs to achieve continuous updating of new knowledge and integrates with large language models to ful-fill dual functions: news authenticity detection and verification of new knowledge correctness, solv-ing the two key problems of ensuring the authen-ticity of new knowledge and deeply mining news semantics. Specifically, we first construct a news-domain-specific knowledge graph. Then, we use Monte Carlo Tree Search to decompose complex news and verify them step by step. Finally, we ex-tract and update new knowledge from verified real news texts and reasoning paths. Experimental re-sults demonstrate that DYNAMO achieves the best performance on two real-world datasets. 

## 1 Introduction 

With the rapid development of the Internet and social media, fake news has been proliferating amid the high-speed dissem-ination of information [Jin et al. , 2025; Wang et al. , 2025; Yu et al. , 2023; Zhu et al. , 2024b]. Misleading information, false advertisements, fabricated accounts, and other state-ments all seriously impact the online experience of users and the security of the network environment [Shu et al. , 2017; Dong et al. , 2023; Wang et al. , 2023]. Given the complexity and diversity of information types, identifying credible news 

> ∗Corresponding Author

among a vast amount of information is challenging [Ma et al. , 2024]. Compared to human judgment, automated techni-cal means for determining the authenticity of news are better suited to handle vast and complex information on the Internet. Traditional methods for detecting fake news can be cat-egorized into three types based on the information re-quired: content-based methods [Hu et al. , 2021; Przybyla, 2020; Dong et al. , 2024; Zhu et al. , 2024a], user-based methods [Chen and Freire, 2020; Dou et al. , 2021] and propagation-based methods [Bian et al. , 2020; Sun et al. ,2023]. These approaches leverage various types of news-related information and have achieved good results in detec-tion accuracy. However, due to their black-box nature [Wang 

et al. , 2024], the models cannot provide explicit reasons to enhance the credibility of detection results. Additionally, tra-ditional methods often require a large amount of manually annotated data for model training. High-quality annotated samples are not only time-consuming and labor-intensive to obtain, but also require annotators to have sufficient under-standing of events to assign accurate labels [Tan et al. , 2024], making data collection a pressing issue. To address the data issue in fake news detection, some studies have begun to consider unsupervised detection meth-ods. Large language models (LLMs), renowned for their re-markable zero-shot learning and advanced reasoning abilities, have been introduced into fake news detection. Using tech-niques such as chain of thought to guide LLMs in outputting their thinking and reasoning processes [Wang et al. , 2024; Pan et al. , 2023], reasonable and informative rationales can be provided from multiple perspectives [Hu et al. , 2024], effec-tively enhancing interpretability. However, LLMs are insen-sitive to real-world dynamics [Sun et al. , 2024]. News events are often sudden and unstable, and their development can lead to shifts in the authenticity of news. Therefore, promptly up-dating the latest developments of events and acquiring the newest information are crucial for fake news detection. The substantial update costs associated with LLMs hin-der the timely updating of their internal knowledge, mak-ing it difficult to meet the high timeliness demands of fake news detection [Wen et al. , 2024]. A direct and effective approach to address the timeliness issue is to use Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). RAG retrieves information from external resources, such as web pages, in an effort Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

> 3000

(a) Ensure the authenticity of the information             

> Information sources with varying degrees of credibility
> According to the report of IPCC, global temperatures are expected to continue rising in the coming decades ... the
> Earth will enter an irreversible stage of greenhouse effect within just three years . Governments, businesses ...
> Intermingling of true and false information
> deforestation of tropical rainforests ecological degradation
> implied fact
> demand for new tourist destinations

(b) Deeply mine news semantics       

> The deforestation trend in tropical rainforests is accelerating, the remote travel market is rising, and global tourism destinations are diversifying.
> extract complex logical relationships
> explicit logic

Figure 1: Two key challenges of knowledge updating. (a) Ensuring the authenticity of the information: The varying reliability of infor-mation sources and the mixture of true and false information make verifying authenticity challenging. (b) Deeply mining news seman-tics: The demand for concise news expression results in complex semantics and multi-layered logical relationships being concealed. 

to capture the latest event developments [Li et al. , 2024b; Niu et al. , 2024]. However, RAG is not without its flaws. It faces challenges such as insufficient credibility of the re-trieved content, interference from noisy information, retrieval inefficiency caused by information overload, and network la-tency issues [Chen et al. , 2024], which may lead to halluci-nation issues in LLMs and reduced efficiency in fake news detection [Adlakha et al. , 2024]. Given the significant advantages of knowledge graphs in adaptability and expansibility, maintenance costs, knowl-edge reliability, and retrieval efficiency [Mou et al. , 2024; Zhang et al. , 2024], we explore the possibility of using knowledge graphs to address the timeliness issue in fake news detection, envisioning the continuous integration of new in-formation (both labeled and unlabeled) into the knowledge graph. Furthermore, due to the timeliness of news, which allows for prompt reporting on the latest events, we choose news as the source of new knowledge. However, as shown in Figure 1, implementing this idea requires overcoming two key challenges: (1) Ensuring the authenticity of the informa-tion: Due to the complexity of knowledge sources and the intermingling of true and false information, verifying the au-thenticity of the information when updating the knowledge graph is an extremely challenging task. (2) Deeply mining news semantics: News is often rich in complex semantic in-formation and multi-layered logical relationships. How to ac-curately and comprehensively mine the rich information em-bedded in news presents another major challenge. Addressing the aforementioned issues, we propose a

DY namic k Nowledge upd Ate-driven MO del for fake news detection ( DYNAMO ). The model simultaneously performs fake news detection and verifies the accuracy of new knowl-edge. It achieves dynamic knowledge updates in fake news detection by updating the knowledge graph, and continuously injecting new knowledge to enhance LLMs’ understanding of various news events. This improves the model’s ability to adapt to event developments, effectively addressing the time-liness requirements of fake news detection. Specifically, we first utilize the LLM to assist in constructing a news-domain-specific knowledge graph as external supplemental knowl-edge. Next, the knowledge graph aids the LLM in detect-ing fake news. Using Monte Carlo Tree Search, the news is broken down into multiple sub-questions, which are an-swered sequentially to verify the authenticity of the news. Additionally, we predict the authenticity of new knowledge by examining the news content. Through Monte Carlo Tree Search, the model explores different news splitting combi-nations to identify the optimal splitting approach, thus un-veiling the deep logical relationships within the news, which is beneficial for subsequent new knowledge extraction. Be-sides, by splitting the news, the model can gradually verify the authenticity of the content, reducing the chances of miss-ing information points and improving detection accuracy and credibility. Finally, for news that is verified as true, the LLM extracts knowledge triples from the news text and reasoning paths, enabling efficient and convenient knowledge updates. To summarize, the contributions of this paper include: • We identify a new issue that needs attention in fake news detection. Due to the development of news events, which may result in alterations to news labels, there is a timeliness requirements for news detection. • We propose a dynamic knowledge update-driven model that innovatively verifies the correctness of new knowl-edge through detecting the authenticity of news, while simultaneously extracting knowledge from real news. • Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed model achieves the state-of-the-art performance on various metrics. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Traditional Methods in Fake News Detection 

Content-based methods determine the authenticity of news by analyzing features such as text, topic selection, and writing style. [Przybyla, 2020] focuses on typical words in fake news to learn the emotional language elements of news for detection. As for news spreading on social media, additional social context information can serve as supplementary infor-mation to assist in detecting fake news. User-based methods believe that factors such as users’ social behaviors and atti-tudes can reveal the likelihood of users spreading fake news. UPFD [Dou et al. , 2021] obtains user preferences by analyz-ing users’ historical posts on social media. Propagation-based methods detect fake news by extracting features of the prop-agation network. Bi-GCN [Bian et al. , 2020] considers both the “top-down” propagation and the “bottom-up” dissemina-tion structure to learn the causal and structural characteristics of rumor propagation. However, due to their black-box na-ture, the models lack interpretability. Furthermore, traditional models in fake news detection rely on high-quality annotated data for model training, which is difficult to collect. 

2.2 LLMs in Fake News Detection 

To alleviate the issues of data collection and interpretability, some approaches have introduced Large Language Models Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

3001 Knowledge Graph Construction 

extract integrate 

Inference Path Search 

> Sub Questions Simple Answers

split 

> News Knowledge
> MCTS
> REAL

Dynamic Knowledge Update 

update extract 

KG  

> Text
> Garth Richardson is a music producer and engineer. He is the son of famous music producer Jack Richardson ...
> Jack Richardson Garth Richardson father alias
> GGGarth
> job

available paths Sub-KG Reliable Source      

> ...
> New Knowledge
> News
> The director of the album "I Am Destroyer" is Jack Richardson's son.
> News
> The director of the album "I Am Destroyer "/is
> Jack Richardson' sson .

generate 

> FAKE
> father

retrieve   

> ...
> Garth Richardson Jack Richardson
> job
> Garth Richardson music producer

Top K Triples KG 

> majority voting
> music producer
> Detection Results Knowledge-based

Figure 2: The overview of our proposed model DYNAMO. 

(LLMs) as detectors. ProgramFC [Pan et al. , 2023] decom-poses complex claims into simpler subtasks and processes them sequentially, guiding the LLM to provide explicit rea-soning processes. L-Defense [Wang et al. , 2024] utilizes the reasoning abilities of the LLM to conduct reasoning and judgment on two opposing sets of evidence, and generate a summary of reasons. Due to the lack of domain-specific expertise in news field by LLMs, some approaches intro-duce knowledge graphs to provide external knowledge for assistance. PEG [Mou et al. , 2024] refines external knowl-edge through semantic filtering and aggregates it into global knowledge. DALK [Mou et al. , 2024] collects evidential sub-graphs through path-based and neighbor-based exploration. To address the timeliness requirements of fake news detec-tion, some approaches adopt Retrieval-Augmented Genera-tion. STEEL [Li et al. , 2024b] and VeraCT Scan [Niu et al. , 2024] retrieve and extract key information from web as external knowledge, thereby mitigating the issue of outdated knowledge in LLMs. However, due to lack of verification of the retrieved information, it may instead mislead the LLM into making incorrect judgments. Furthermore, it fails to truly achieve knowledge updating. 

## 3 Methods 

Figure 2 presents the overview of our model. Firstly, we ex-tract knowledge from news-related texts generated by reli-able sources to construct a news-domain-specific knowledge graph. Secondly, we utilize the knowledge graph to assist the LLM in completing fake news detection. Lastly, we leverage the LLM to extract new knowledge from authentic news and reasoning paths for updating the knowledge graph. 

3.1 Task Definition 

There is a news-domain-specific knowledge graph G =(E, R, S ), where E is the set of entities, R is the set of re-lations and S ⊆ E × R × E is the set of triples. L denotes the LLM used for detection. The task of our model is to predict the label y ∈ { Real , Fake } for a given news article c involv-ing the knowledge graph. Mathematically, y = L(c, G ).

3.2 Knowledge Graph Construction 

Knowledge graphs possess structured formats and expansi-bility [Li et al. , 2024a], hence we select knowledge graphs as the carrier for knowledge retrieval and updating. The exist-ing knowledge graphs lack the relevant knowledge to support fake news detection. To enhance LLMs’ understanding of news, we first construct a news-domain-specific knowledge graph G, integrating various types of information involved in news events in a structured manner. The source of knowledge is news-related texts generated by reliable sources. 

Entity-Centered Knowledge Extraction. Firstly, key en-tities are extracted from the text to form an entity set E. To obtain more knowledge-rich triples, inspired by [Li et al. ,2024a], we adopt a generative approach to extract relations between entities. Thus, the vocabulary used to describe rela-tions between entities is not limited by the original text. The entity set and text are input into the LLM, which is instructed to extract keywords for describing the relations between rele-vant entities or directly generate new summary terms R, and output the corresponding knowledge triples S.

Event-Centered Knowledge Extraction. Furthermore, due to the inclusion of multifaceted factors such as time and location in facts, these elements cannot be simply summa-rized as two entities and the relationship between them. Con-sequently, we also adopt the form of (subject, predicate, ob-ject) to guide the LLM in extracting triples for events. Thus, we obtain a comprehensive news-domain-specific knowledge graph and it is used to assist subsequent modules. 

3.3 Inference Path Search 

Due to the pursuit of concise expression in news reporting, many complex semantics and logical relationships may be Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

3002 summarized in brief statements, leading to increased diffi-culty in understanding. We break down complex news into several simple sub-questions, answer and verify their truthful-ness sequentially, thereby dissecting the underlying semantic relationships and reducing the difficulty for the LLM to un-derstand and judge. Additionally, breaking down the news al-lows the LLM to output its thinking and reasoning processes, enhancing interpretability. At the same time, by requiring the LLM to output intermediate results, we prompt it to more fully utilize its internal knowledge and provide richer infor-mation for subsequent updates to the knowledge graph. 

Monte Carlo Tree Search. Inspired by [Qi et al. , 2024], we utilize Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with multiple types of actions to generate reasoning paths, thereby accom-plishing the breakdown and verification of news. MCTS is ca-pable of finding approximately optimal strategies within lim-ited time, thus it is ideal for large-scale problems. Addition-ally, the algorithmic structure of MCTS is relatively simple, facilitating easy implementation and extension. For each piece of news c, the model constructs a search tree T . The root node of T represents the news c, an edge represents an action a, and each child node is an intermedi-ate step s generated by the LLM L based on the correspond-ing action. The path from the root node to a leaf node sd

constitutes a candidate reasoning path t = ( c, s 1, s 2, . . . , s d),where d ≤ h and h is the pre-defined height limit of the tree. From the search tree T , we can extract a set of reasoning paths 

Troute = {t1, t 2, . . . , t n}, where n ≥ 1 and n is the number of searches conducted. To enhance detection efficiency and adapt the model to fake news detection tasks, we define three types of actions: 

A1: Generate a sub-question. In this step, the LLM is re-quired to propose the next sub-question to be answered based on the previous question-and-answer process, thereby break-ing down the news into simpler content that is easier for the LLM to verify as true or false. 

A2: Answer a sub-question. In this step, the LLM utilizes its own knowledge to answer the sub-question generated in step A1, thereby prompting the LLM to generate a detailed and reliable reasoning process and providing more knowl-edge for subsequent updates to the knowledge graph. 

A3: Provide a detection result. If the current question-and-answer process generated contains sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the news, the LLM is allowed to directly give the final prediction result in this step. Next, we introduce how to select actions. For explored nodes, reward scores are assigned to the nodes during the back-propagation process. Initially, the reward score for all nodes is defined as Q(s) = 0 . We define the reward score based on the current reasoning results as follows: 

r = pmajor 

pmajor + pminor 

, (1) where pmajor is the number of reasoning paths whose results belong to the majority outcome, and pminor is the number of reasoning paths with minority outcomes. When a leaf node sd appears, if the judgment result of this leaf node sd is consistent with the judgment results of the current majority, then a reward will be assigned to each node on the corresponding reasoning path t′ of sd, that is: 

Q(si) = Q(si) + r, si ∈ t′. (2) Then, the Upper Confidence Bounds applied to Trees (UCT) strategy is used for node selection, with the specific formula as follows: 

U CT (sj ) = Q(sj )

V (sj ) + α

s

ln Vparent (sj )

V (sj ) , sj ∈ T. (3) Here, Q represents the node score, α is a constant, V denotes the visit count, and Vparent is the visit count of the parent node. At each timestamp i, MCTS randomly selects an unex-plored node si and uses a prompt to guide the LLM to gen-erate the relevant content for si based on the current path 

(c, s 1, s 2, . . . , s i−1), or selects an explored node according to the UCT strategy. Additionally, there exists a precedence re-lationship among different action types, which is manifested as follows: A2 can only occur after A1, and A3 can only oc-cur after the root node and A2. For the final detection result of news c, we adopt the majority voting, where the majority result among multiple leaf nodes is selected as the final result. 

Knowledge Graph Enhancement. To enhance the under-standing of news by the LLM, we utilize the knowledge graph constructed in Section 3.2 as the external knowledge to assist in detection. During Action A2 of the MCTS, news-related knowledge triples can be provided as supplementary knowl-edge to the LLM, thereby augmenting its capabilities. Firstly, we extract key entities from the sub-question to form an entity set for the question, denoted as EQ. We then match the en-tities in EQ with those in the knowledge graph G to obtain a matched entity set EG. From EG, we construct a problem-specific knowledge subgraph GQ comprising the one-hop triples associated with the entities in EG. Due to the lim-ited input text length of LLMs, we filter the retrieved triples. We use a prompt to guide the LLM in ranking the knowledge triples based on their relevance to the sub-question, and select the top-K triples as the final supplementary knowledge. 

3.4 Dynamic Knowledge Update 

We aim to fully leverage the knowledge acquired during the detection process to facilitate detection of similar news in the future. Additionally, dynamically updating the model’s knowledge allows it to stay informed about the development of events, thereby enhancing its capability to handle real-world scenarios. Therefore, for news confirmed as true in the detection results, we extract new knowledge from the question-and-answer process involving the news text and rea-soning paths, which is used to update the knowledge graph. The method for extracting triples here is the same as the approach used in Section 3.2 for constructing the knowledge graph. Firstly, we extract key entities from the text to form a new entity set Enew . We then input the entity set and the text into the LLM, instructing it to extract keywords that describe the relationships between relevant entities or directly gen-erate new summary terms Rnew , and output the correspond-ing triples Snew . Finally, we store the newly acquired triples 

Gnew = ( Enew , R new , S new ) into the knowledge graph G. The updated G will be utilized in the subsequent news detection, and it will continuously be updated with new knowledge ex-tracted from news that will be verified as true. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

> 3003

Methods Hover Feverous Accuracy F1 Precision Recall Accuracy F1 Precision Recall 

RoBERTa-NLI 0.4395 0.3141 0.6145 0.2109 0.4301 0.1986 0.5266 0.1224 BERT-FC 0.5858 0.5619 0.5660 0.5579 0.5548 0.3081 0.4603 0.2315 GET 0.5378 0.4398 0.4830 0.4928 0.5523 0.4427 0.5579 0.5005 ProgramFC 0.4701 0.3640 0.7280 0.2427 0.5433 0.4869 0.7345 0.3641 TOG 0.5548 0.5915 0.6736 0.5272 0.6093 0.6599 0.7143 0.6132 CoRAG 0.5440 0.3824 0.6474 0.2732 0.6030 0.5912 0.6293 0.5574 Phi3-mini 0.5850 0.5951 0.7176 0.5083 0.6090 0.5412 0.7169 0.4347 

DYNAMO 0.6250 0.7401 0.7367 0.7436 0.6167 0.7433 0.7384 0.7483 

> Table 1: Performance comparison on two datasets of our model and baselines. The best performance is in bold.

## 4 Experiments 

We first introduce the datasets, baselines, and various set-tings used in the experiments (Section 4.1). We validate the model’s performance on two real-world datasets (Sec-tion 4.2). Additionally, we design experiments to demonstrate the advantages of dynamic knowledge updating (Section 4.3). Then, we conduct ablation experiments to verify the necessity of each component and the rationality of the parameter (Sec-tion 4.4). Finally, we present a case to showcase how dynamic knowledge updating aids fake news detection (Section 4.5). 

4.1 Experiment Setting 

Datasets. To validate the enhancement effect of the dynami-cally updated knowledge graph, we require datasets that com-prise a series of news with similar content but differing key-words and labels. Additionally, we desire the datasets to in-clude factual statements related to the news, which can be uti-lized to construct a news-specific knowledge graph. In sum-mary, two real-world datasets are selected for experiments. Hover [Jiang et al. , 2020] is a dataset of multi-hop factual statements, containing 18,171 samples. It extracts facts from several Wikipedia articles related to factual statements and categorizes whether the statements are correct. Feverous [Aly 

et al. , 2021], with 26,928 samples, extracts structured evi-dence, unstructured evidence, or a combination of both from Wikipedia to verify statements. Since we focus solely on data in natural language form, we follow the setup of [Pan et al. ,2023] and select only sentence evidence and corresponding statements as our samples. 

Baselines. We compare the proposed model with the fol-lowing baseline models: (1) Traditional methods: RoBERTa-NLI [Nie et al. , 2020] utilizes a finely tuned version of RoBERTa-large across four natural language inference datasets and BERT-FC [Soleimani et al. , 2020] trains BERT to complete fact-checking tasks. GET [Xu et al. , 2022] imple-ments graph-based semantic structure mining to learn long-distance semantic dependency relationships. (2) LLM-based methods: ProgramFC [Pan et al. , 2023] breaks down com-plex claims into simpler sub-claims and TOG [Sun et al. ,2024] utilizes a LLM agent iteratively to perform beam search on the KG to discover the most promising reasoning paths. CoRAG [Khaliq et al. , 2024] is a real-time retrieval-based model. Phi3-mini [Abdin et al. , 2024] is the LLM backbone that we utilize for DYNAMO and the LLM-based baselines. Here we use the form of direct questioning to prompt Phi3-mini to assess the authenticity of the news. 

Implementation Details. We select Phi3-mini-128k as the LLM backbone for DYNAMO and the LLM-based baselines. We follow the experimental setup for few-shot learning, so we set the number of samples for training and few-shot learn-ing to 3, and adopt 5 epochs for training. For the proposed model, the number of times MCTS is executed, n, is 5, with the height limit h of the search tree set to 5 and 9 respectively for the Hover and Feverous datasets. Each node generating 2 child nodes when a new action is executed. For knowl-edge graph retrieval, we select the top-5 knowledge triples as external knowledge input to the large language model. The constant α in the formula 3 is set to 2. 

Experimental Environment. Experiments are conducted on the PyTorch 2.5.0 platform with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6326 CPU (2.90GHz) and an NVIDIA A40 48GB GPU. 

4.2 Experiment Results 

Table 1 presents the performance of the proposed model and baseline models on two datasets. Relevant knowledge triples are retrieved from the knowledge graph constructed in Section 3.2 to serve as external knowledge. As can be seen from Table 1, we can draw the following conclusions: (1) DYNAMO has achieved state-of-the-art accuracy on two datasets. This is attributed to the Monte Carlo Tree Search, which breaks down logically complex news text into easily understandable sub-questions. The simpler input content and tasks alleviate the difficulty for LLMs in understanding the text, preventing issues such as hallucinations, where LLMs provide incorrect answers or refuse to answer, thereby en-hancing the quality of task completion. Since the decom-posed sub-questions require LLMs to provide intermediate answers, it can guide LLMs to integrate external knowledge and fully utilize their internal knowledge for comprehensive analysis when answering questions. (2) Furthermore, we em-ploy F1 score, precision, and recall to conduct a more detailed evaluation of each model’s performance. It can be observed that DYNAMO achieves optimal performance across all these metrics. High precision and high recall indicate that DY-NAMO identifies as many positive samples as possible with a high degree of confidence. This means that we have iden-tified a significant number of real news, and our predictions for these real news are reliable. This is highly beneficial for Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

> 3004

Settings Hover1 Hover2 Hover2+kg1 Hover3 Hover3+kg1&2 

DYNAMO 0.6309 0.6267 0.6400 0.6167 0.6300 

Table 2: Performance gain achieved by knowledge graph updates on Hover. The evaluation metric is accuracy in the table. 

Settings Feverous1 Feverous2 Feverous2+kg1 Feverous3 Feverous3+kg1&2 

DYNAMO 0.6373 0.6127 0.6195 0.6000 0.6075 

Table 3: Performance gain achieved by knowledge graph updates on Feverous. The evaluation metric is accuracy in the table. 

Methods Hover Feverous w/o kg w/ kg w/o kg w/ kg 

LLaMA 0.5000 0.5167 0.6180 0.6342 Flan-T5 0.5707 0.5807 0.5667 0.5753 Phi3-mini 0.5790 0.5850 0.5990 0.6090 Ours + LLaMA 0.5241 0.5441 0.6233 0.6550 Ours + Flan-T5 0.5962 0.6077 0.5874 0.5924 Ours + Phi3-mini 0.6007 0.6250 0.6042 0.6167 

Table 4: Performance comparison across different LLM backbones with and without the knowledge graph. The evaluation metric is accuracy in the table. 

our subsequent new knowledge extraction, as our new knowl-edge is derived from the texts and reasoning processes of real news. (3) Compared to traditional methods, LLM-based ap-proaches do not demonstrate significant advantages in terms of various metrics. This suggests that using LLMs does not necessarily enhance the performance of fake news detection and may even make it difficult for the models to learn the hid-den relationships between data. LLMs can only fully exert their potential when appropriate input content is designed. 

4.3 Evaluation on Knowledge Graph Update 

Table 2 and Table 3 demonstrate the improvement in detec-tion accuracy brought about by updates to the knowledge graph. To verify the contribution of these updates, we divide each of the two datasets into three subsets. These subsets con-tain news reports on the same news events but with different focuses and labels, allowing us to validate whether newly ac-quired knowledge from previously encountered similar news events can assist in the detection of unseen news. To better validate the model’s ability to handle unseen news, we reduce the external knowledge provided to the model regarding the last two data subsets of Hover and Feverous. Specifically, the initial knowledge graph used in this experiment is con-structed solely based on the relevant factual texts from the 1st subset of Hover and Feverous, excluding any information from other subsets, and subsequent updates are made on this foundation. In the table header, “Hover2+kg1” indicates that when detecting the 2nd subset of Hover, the knowledge graph updated during the detection of the 1st subset is used as ex-ternal knowledge to assist in the detection process. As shown in Table 2 and Table 3, through updates to the knowledge graph, the detection accuracy has been improved by an av-2 4 6 8 10     

> h
> 58
> 59
> 60
> 61
> 62
> 63
> Accuracy
> Hover
> w/ kg w/o kg 246810
> h
> 59
> 60
> 61
> 62
> Accuracy
> Feverous
> w/ kg w/o kg

Figure 3: Evaluation of the accuracy by varying the height limit h

of the Monte Carlo Tree Search. 

erage of 1%. This is because our model extracts reliable and concise new knowledge from real news, filling the knowledge gap in LLMs and knowledge graphs regarding newly occur-ring news. The new knowledge enables LLMs to gain some understanding of new news events when they are unable to update their internal knowledge, thereby making more accu-rate judgments on the authenticity of the news. 

4.4 Ablation Study 

To validate the impact of different modules and the param-eter on the overall performance of our proposed model, we conduct multiple ablation experiments. 

LLM Backbones. To demonstrate the universality of our method across different LLMs, we additionally select two LLMs: Flan-T5-XL [Chung et al. , 2024] and LLaMA-13B [Touvron et al. , 2023], as the backbone LLMs. The “w/o kg” stands for “without knowledge graph”. The “w/ kg” stands for “with knowledge graph”, representing the sce-nario where relevant knowledge triples are retrieved from the knowledge graph to serve as external knowledge. As shown in Table 4, by comparing the performance when only the LLM is used as the detector versus when our proposed framework is applied under the same LLM settings, it can be observed that our approach enhances the detection perfor-mance of various LLMs. This is because news segmentation alleviates the difficulty for LLMs in understanding complex logic, and Monte Carlo Tree Search optimizes the segmen-tation process by quickly identifying suitable segmentation methods within a large search space. This experiment con-firms the effectiveness of our method across various LLMs. 

External Knowledge. To validate the effectiveness of the knowledge graph extracted in Section 3.2, we conduct exper-Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

3005 News 1 : During World War II, Dwight D. Eisenhower was Kenneth              

> Anderson's superior.
> What was Dwight D. Eisenhower's position during World War II?
> Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces in Europe Was the Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe the superior of the Commander of the British First Army?
> Reasoning Paths:
> What was Kenneth Anderson's position
> during World War II?
> Commander of the British First Army
> Supreme Commander of the Allied ... Knowledge Graphs:
> position
> Dwight D. Eisenhower
> is superior of
> Commander of British ...
> position
> Kenneth Anderson
> Yes Real News
> [ REAL ]
> detect
> News 2 : Kenneth Anderson served under the General who was the 34th President of the United States. [ REAL ]
> Kenneth Anderson
> is superior of
> New Knowledge Triple
> the 34th President of the United States
> job
> Who was the 34th President of the United States?
> Dwight D. Eisenhower
> Dwight D. Eisenhower
> Did Kenneth Anderson serve under the General Dwight D. Eisenhower? Not enough information Fake News Yes
> Real News without new knowledge with new knowledge

Figure 4: A set of news cases from Hover dataset. The newly acquired knowledge assists in the detection of similar news. 

iments with different LLM backbones and datasets under two settings: without the involvement of the knowledge graph and with the involvement of the knowledge graph. The “w/o kg” stands for “without knowledge graph” and the “w/ kg” rep-resents the scenario where relevant knowledge triples are re-trieved from the knowledge graph to serve as external knowl-edge. As shown in Table 4, the results confirm that the knowl-edge graph can provide additional knowledge for fake news detection, thereby improving detection accuracy. 

Hyper-parameter Sensitivity Analysis. To enhance rea-soning efficiency, we impose a height limit on the Monte Carlo Tree Search. To investigate the impact of the parameter height limit h on detection results, we compare the accuracy of fake news detection under different height limits using the same experimental settings. Figure 3 illustrates that, on the whole, our model demonstrates robustness to the parameter 

h, and variations in h do not cause abrupt changes in detec-tion accuracy. For the Hover dataset, the model performs best when h is set to 5, regardless of whether the knowledge graph is involved. In contrast, for the Feverous dataset, the optimal performance of the model occurs when h is set to 9. This is because compared to Hover, news in Feverous tend to be more verbose, containing more complex logical relationships. If h is set too low, the reasoning process for some samples may not be completed. Conversely, for the Hover dataset, an excessively high h can lead to excessive deep reasoning, potentially introducing too much interfering information and affecting the judgment of the LLM. Therefore, we set h to 5 and 9 respectively for the Hover and Feverous datasets. 

4.5 Case Study 

To visually demonstrate the enhancement effect of dynami-cally updated knowledge on fake news detection, we select a set of news cases from the Hover dataset and present the en-tire process of their detection and the process of updating the knowledge graph. As shown in Figure 4, News 1 and News 2 constitute a pair of news that are content-related but differ in their wording and focus. During the initial stage of detecting News 1, the model lacks relevant information about the relationship between Dwight D. Eisenhower and Kenneth Anderson, and there-fore can not directly provide a detection result. During the Monte Carlo Tree Search process, the LLM leverages its in-ternal knowledge and the initial knowledge graph to obtain the positions held by Dwight D. Eisenhower and Kenneth An-derson during World War II, and recognizes the hierarchical relationship between the two positions. Based on this, the model integrates the information contained in the reasoning path, deduces the relationship between the two individuals, and judges the news to be true. Subsequently, the model ex-tracts “Dwight D. Eisenhower was Kenneth Anderson’s su-perior” from the news content as new knowledge and updates it into the knowledge graph. For the detection of News 2, if there is no additional new knowledge, the model still would not know the relationship between the two individuals and cannot guide itself to think step-by-step by splitting the news. Therefore, in situations where there is insufficient informa-tion to support a judgment, the model tends to deem the news as fake. However, with the incorporation of new knowledge, the model can directly retrieve the relevant triples of knowl-edge to obtain the relationship between the two individuals, thereby swiftly judging the news as true. Thus, using Monte Carlo Tree Search to split the news can guide the model to think step-by-step and integrate the infor-mation, thereby obtaining new relationships between entities. Through knowledge updating, the model can possess more adequate knowledge to judge similar news. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we achieve dynamic knowledge updating in fake news detection, , thus providing a feasible approach to ad-dress the timeliness requirements in this field. Specifically, we leverage knowledge graphs to enable continuous updat-ing of new knowledge and integrate large language models to perform the dual functions of news authenticity detec-tion and verification of the correctness of new knowledge, thereby solving two key issues: ensuring the authenticity of new knowledge and deeply mining news semantics. Since fake news often contains a mixture of true and false information, and useful real information may be embedded within false news, in the future, we plan to implement fine-grained acquisition of new knowledge. For news detected as fake, we will distinguish between the true and false parts and extract new knowledge from the true parts, thereby maximiz-ing the utilization of the detected news. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

3006 Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62302333, 92370111, 62422210, 62272340, 62276187), and Hebei Natural Science Founda-tion (No. F2024202047) . 

## References 

[Abdin et al. , 2024] Marah I Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Am-mar Ahmad Awan, and et al. Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone. 

CoRR , abs/2404.14219, 2024. [Adlakha et al. , 2024] Vaibhav Adlakha, Parishad BehnamGhader, Xing Han Lu, Nicholas Meade, and Siva Reddy. Evaluating correctness and faithfulness of instruction-following models for question answer-ing. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:681–699, 2024. [Aly et al. , 2021] Rami Aly, Zhijiang Guo, Michael Sejr Schlichtkrull, James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, Oana Cocarascu, and Arpit Mittal. FEVEROUS: fact extraction and verification over unstruc-tured and structured information. In Proceedings of the 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems (NeurIPS) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , 2021. [Bian et al. , 2020] Tian Bian, Xi Xiao, Tingyang Xu, Peilin Zhao, Wenbing Huang, Yu Rong, and Junzhou Huang. Ru-mor detection on social media with bi-directional graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 549– 556, 2020. [Chen and Freire, 2020] Zhouhan Chen and Juliana Freire. Proactive discovery of fake news domains from real-time social media feeds. In Companion Proceedings of the In-ternational World Wide Web Conference , pages 584–592, 2020. [Chen et al. , 2024] Jiawei Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 38th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 17754– 17762, 2024. [Chung et al. , 2024] Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, and et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(70):1– 53, 2024. [Dong et al. , 2023] Yiqi Dong, Dongxiao He, Xiaobao Wang, Yawen Li, Xiaowen Su, and Di Jin. A general-ized deep markov random fields framework for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 4758–4765, 2023. [Dong et al. , 2024] Yiqi Dong, Dongxiao He, Xiaobao Wang, Youzhu Jin, Meng Ge, Carl Yang, and Di Jin. Unveiling implicit deceptive patterns in multi-modal fake news via neuro-symbolic reasoning. In Proceedings of the 38th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 8354–8362, 2024. [Dou et al. , 2021] Yingtong Dou, Kai Shu, Congying Xia, Philip S. Yu, and Lichao Sun. User preference-aware fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 2051–2055, 2021. [Hu et al. , 2021] Linmei Hu, Tianchi Yang, Luhao Zhang, Wanjun Zhong, Duyu Tang, Chuan Shi, Nan Duan, and Ming Zhou. Compare to the knowledge: Graph neural fake news detection with external knowledge. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 754–763, 2021. [Hu et al. , 2024] Beizhe Hu, Qiang Sheng, Juan Cao, Yuhui Shi, Yang Li, Danding Wang, and Peng Qi. Bad actor, good advisor: Exploring the role of large language models in fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 38th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 22105–22113, 2024. [Jiang et al. , 2020] Yichen Jiang, Shikha Bordia, Zheng Zhong, Charles Dognin, Maneesh Kumar Singh, and Mo-hit Bansal. Hover: A dataset for many-hop fact extraction and claim verification. In Findings of the Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3441–3460, 2020. [Jin et al. , 2025] Di Jin, Yujun Zhang, Bingdao Feng, Xi-aobao Wang, Dongxiao He, and Zhen Wang. Backdoor attack on propagation-based rumor detectors. In Proceed-ings of the 39th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,pages 17680–17688, 2025. [Khaliq et al. , 2024] Mohammed Abdul Khaliq, Paul Yu-Chun Chang, Mingyang Ma, Bernhard Pflugfelder, and Filip Mileti´ c. Ragar, your falsehood RADAR: rag-augmented reasoning for political fact-checking using multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Fact Extraction and VERification (FEVER) , pages 280–296, 2024. [Li et al. , 2024a] Dawei Li, Shu Yang, Zhen Tan, Jae Young Baik, Sukwon Yun, Joseph Lee, Aaron Chacko, Bojian Hou, Duy Duong-Tran, Ying Ding, Huan Liu, Li Shen, and Tianlong Chen. DALK: dynamic co-augmentation of llms and KG to answer alzheimer’s disease questions with scientific literature. In Findings of the Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2187–2205, 2024. [Li et al. , 2024b] Guanghua Li, Wensheng Lu, Wei Zhang, Defu Lian, Kezhong Lu, Rui Mao, Kai Shu, and Hao Liao. Re-search for the truth: Multi-round retrieval-augmented large language models are strong fake news detectors. 

CoRR , abs/2403.09747, 2024. [Ma et al. , 2024] Huiying Ma, Dongxiao He, Xiaobao Wang, Di Jin, Meng Ge, and Longbiao Wang. Multi-modal sar-casm detection based on dual generative processes. In Pro-ceedings of the 33rd International Joint Conference on Ar-tificial Intelligence , pages 2279–2287, 2024. [Mou et al. , 2024] Xinyi Mou, Zejun Li, Hanjia Lyu, Jiebo Luo, and Zhongyu Wei. Unifying local and global knowl-edge: Empowering large language models as political ex-perts with knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the Inter-Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) 

> 3007

national World Wide Web Conferences , pages 2603–2614, 2024. [Nie et al. , 2020] Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. Adver-sarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4885– 4901, 2020. [Niu et al. , 2024] Cheng Niu, Yang Guan, Yuanhao Wu, Juno Zhu, Juntong Song, Randy Zhong, Kaihua Zhu, Sil-iang Xu, Shizhe Diao, and Tong Zhang. Veract scan: Retrieval-augmented fake news detection with justifiable reasoning. CoRR , abs/2406.10289, 2024. [Pan et al. , 2023] Liangming Pan, Xiaobao Wu, Xinyuan Lu, Anh Tuan Luu, William Yang Wang, Min-Yen Kan, and Preslav Nakov. Fact-checking complex claims with program-guided reasoning. In Proceedings of the 61st An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 6981–7004, 2023. [Przybyla, 2020] Piotr Przybyla. Capturing the style of fake news. In Proceedings of the 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 490–497, 2020. [Qi et al. , 2024] Zhenting Qi, Mingyuan Ma, Jiahang Xu, Li Lyna Zhang, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Mutual reason-ing makes smaller llms stronger problem-solvers. CoRR ,abs/2408.06195, 2024. [Shu et al. , 2017] Kai Shu, Amy Sliva, Suhang Wang, Jiliang Tang, and Huan Liu. Fake news detection on social me-dia: A data mining perspective. SIGKDD Explorations ,19(1):22–36, 2017. [Soleimani et al. , 2020] Amir Soleimani, Christof Monz, and Marcel Worring. BERT for evidence retrieval and claim verification. In Proceedings of the 42nd Euro-pean Conference on Information Retrieval , pages 359– 366, 2020. [Sun et al. , 2023] Ling Sun, Yuan Rao, Yuqian Lan, Bingcan Xia, and Yangyang Li. HG-SL: jointly learning of global and local user spreading behavior for fake news early de-tection. In Proceedings of the 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 5248–5256, 2023. [Sun et al. , 2024] Jiashuo Sun, Chengjin Xu, Lumingyuan Tang, Saizhuo Wang, Chen Lin, Yeyun Gong, Lionel M. Ni, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. Think-on-graph: Deep and responsible reasoning of large language model on knowledge graph. In Proceedings of the 12th Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [Tan et al. , 2024] Zhen Tan, Dawei Li, Song Wang, Alimo-hammad Beigi, Bohan Jiang, Amrita Bhattacharjee, Man-sooreh Karami, Jundong Li, Lu Cheng, and Huan Liu. Large language models for data annotation and synthesis: A survey. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 930–957, 2024. [Touvron et al. , 2023] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gau-tier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Tim-oth´ ee Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi` ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aur´ elien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. CoRR ,abs/2302.13971, 2023. [Wang et al. , 2023] Xiaobao Wang, Yiqi Dong, Di Jin, Yawen Li, Longbiao Wang, and Jianwu Dang. Augment-ing affective dependency graph via iterative incongruity graph learning for sarcasm detection. In Proceedings of the 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 4702–4710, 2023. [Wang et al. , 2024] Bo Wang, Jing Ma, Hongzhan Lin, Zhi-wei Yang, Ruichao Yang, Yuan Tian, and Yi Chang. Ex-plainable fake news detection with large language model via defense among competing wisdom. In Proceedings of the International World Wide Web Conferences , pages 2452–2463, 2024. [Wang et al. , 2025] Xiaobao Wang, Yujing Wang, Dongxiao He, Zhe Yu, Yawen Li, Longbiao Wang, Jianwu Dang, and Di Jin. Elevating knowledge-enhanced entity and relation-ship understanding for sarcasm detection. IEEE Transac-tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 37(6):3356– 3371, 2025. [Wen et al. , 2024] Yilin Wen, Zifeng Wang, and Jimeng Sun. Mindmap: Knowledge graph prompting sparks graph of thoughts in large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 10370–10388, 2024. [Xu et al. , 2022] Weizhi Xu, Junfei Wu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Evidence-aware fake news detection with graph neural networks. In Proceedings of the Inter-national World Wide Web Conferences , pages 2501–2510, 2022. [Yu et al. , 2023] Zhe Yu, Di Jin, Xiaobao Wang, Yawen Li, Longbiao Wang, and Jianwu Dang. Commonsense knowl-edge enhanced sentiment dependency graph for sarcasm detection. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 2423–2431, 2023. [Zhang et al. , 2024] Yichi Zhang, Zhuo Chen, Yin Fang, Yanxi Lu, Fangming Li, Wen Zhang, and Huajun Chen. Knowledgeable preference alignment for llms in domain-specific question answering. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 891–904, 2024. [Zhu et al. , 2024a] Peican Zhu, Jiaheng Hua, Keke Tang, Ji-wei Tian, Jiwei Xu, and Xiaodong Cui. Multimodal fake news detection through intra-modality feature aggregation and inter-modality semantic fusion. Complex & Intelligent Systems , 10(4):5851–5863, 2024. [Zhu et al. , 2024b] Peican Zhu, Zechen Pan, Yang Liu, Jiwei Tian, Keke Tang, and Zhen Wang. A general black-box adversarial attack on graph-based fake news detectors. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 568–576, 2024. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25)