Title: 2025.findings-emnlp.1134.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-emnlp.1134.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 31 Oct 2025 19:49:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 20808–20814 November 4-9, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics SA-CLIP: Language Guided Image Spatial and Action Feature Learning 

Guanlin Li 1∗

, Wenhao Shao 2∗

, Praboda Rajapaksha 1,3 , Noël Crespi 1

1Samovar, Telecom SudParis, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France 

2School of Computer, Electronics and Information, Guangxi University, China 

3Department of Computer Science, Aberystwyth University, UK 

{guanlin_li, noel.crespi}@telecom-sudparis.eu wenhao.shao@gxu.edu.cn, prr16@aber.ac.uk 

Abstract 

We observed that Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) models struggle with real-world downstream tasks such as road traffic anomaly detection, due to their inability to ef-fectively capture spatial and action relation-ships between objects within images. To ad-dress this, we propose a dependency parsing based method to compile and curate a dataset with 1M samples of images using language su-pervision provided by the common image cap-tion dataset, in which each image is paired with subject-relationship-object descriptions empha-sizing spatial and action interactions, and train a Spatial and Action relationship aware CLIP 

(SA-CLIP ) model. We evaluated the proposed model on the Visual Spatial Reasoning (VSR) dataset and further verified its effectiveness on the Detection-of-Traffic-Anomaly (DoTA) dataset. Experiment results show that the pro-posed SA-CLIP demonstrates strong abilities in understanding spatial relationships while achieving good zero-shot performance on the traffic anomaly detection task. 

1 Introduction 

Vision-language models have demonstrated strong potential in real-world tasks and in producing ex-plainable results (Lv and Sun, 2024; Zanella et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024), among which the CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) based models gain particu-lar attention (Pan et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2024). CLIP is pretrained to align im-age and text representations by minimizing their distance, and shows strong generalization ability for real-world image-text matching tasks. Such ability makes CLIP particularly attractive for tasks requiring a high degree of interpretability, as it allows the model to explain its decisions in human-understandable terms by linking specific visual ele-ments with descriptive language, while being com- 

> ∗

Equal contribution. Anomaly  Normal                                                            

> Motorized Vehicle -to -Motorized
> Vehicle Collisions
> The bumper of {car} pressed against the bumper of {car} .
> The side door of {car} smashed by the front end of {car} .
> 75%
> 69%
> 58%
> SA -CLIP
> Anomaly Normal
> Motorized Vehicle -to -Motorized
> Vehicle Collisions
> 48%
> 46%
> 48%
> 49%
> 47%
> CLIP
> The bumper of {car} pressed against the bumper of {car} .
> The side door of {car} smashed by the front end of {car} .
> The side door of {car} is away from the front end of {car} .
> The bumper of {car} is alongside the bumper of {car} .
> 36%
> The bumper of {car} is alongside the bumper of {car} .
> 47%
> The side door of {car} is away from the front end of {car} .

Figure 1: Comparison of image-text matching scores be-tween SA-CLIP and CLIP in the traffic anomaly scene. SA-CLIP focuses on the objects and relationships be-tween the objects both in image and text, and achieves better anomaly detection ability than the vanilla CLIP. 

putationally effective, relying only on similarity computation at inference time. However, despite its strengths, the CLIP model shows limitations in complex scenarios. We ob-served that CLIP model is unable to distinguish between the normal and abnormal scenes through textual descriptions, as shown in the right part of Fig. 1. We hypothesize and confirm through exper-iments that the CLIP model is unable to accurately capture and reason about the spatial and action relationships between objects both in images and those described in texts, which are often critical in such real-world scenarios. For example, the rel-ative positions of vehicles, pedestrians, and road signs could determine whether a situation is nor-mal or potentially dangerous. Without a deep un-derstanding of these spatial relationships and the action interaction between the objects, the model may misclassify events, leading to false positives or missed detections. To address this challenge, in this paper we propose to enhance the CLIP model’s abil-ity for spatial and action relationship understand-ing in both image scenes and textual descriptions. We first curate a dataset that focuses on the main objects and their spatial and action relationships 

20808 in the image scenes, using the language descrip-tion provided by the caption of the images, based on the existing large-scale image-caption datasets. We exploit the linguistic patterns and develop a rule-based method to extract subject-relationship-object triplets from the captions, and train a relation classification model to filter out the low-quality triplets. Leveraging the compiled dataset, we in-troduce Spatial-Action CLIP (SA-CLIP ), which explicitly models the spatial and action relation-ships between objects in the images by learning to map the subject-relationship-object triplet in texts to the objects and their positions in images. Exper-iment results on the VSR dataset (Liu et al., 2023) demonstrate the effectiveness of the model in mod-elling spatial relationships. We further verify the model’s ability to address real-world tasks by eval-uating on the DoTA dataset (Yao et al., 2022) for the road traffic anomaly detection task. 

2 Methodology 

To improve CLIP’s ability to understand spatial and action relationships among objects in scenes, we focus on the Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) struc-ture in both image descriptions and scene graphs. The SVO structure is a fundamental linguistic pat-tern that describes interactions (verbs) between sub-jects and objects, and we extend the verbal refer-ences to include prepositional phrases (PPs) that indicate spatial relationships. We train CLIP to map the SVO structures from language to visual representations. Due to the scarcity of datasets with diverse and detailed spatial and action anno-tations, we mine such information from abundant image-caption datasets and pretrain the proposed SA-CLIP on the curated data. 

2.1 Dataset Curation 

The approach follows a two-step process. First, we apply a rule-based parser to extract SVO triplets from a seed subset of image-caption data, sam-pled from cleaner sources such as MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014) to reduce noise. The parser extracts subjects, objects, and associated verbal or preposi-tional phrases to form initial triplets. In the second step, we filter noisy triplets. The wrongly extracted triplets usually exhibit significant semantic incon-sistencies between subjects and objects and their relations, which can be easily identified by LLMs. Therefore, we leverage LLMs to annotate the seed data and train a lightweight relation classifier on A 

> DET
> girl
> NOUN
> on
> ADP
> the
> DET
> left
> NOUN
> of
> ADP
> the
> DET
> cat
> NOUN
> rules
> IF ROOT is NOUN
> IF child of ROOT is ADP
> IF child of ADP is NOUN
> ……
> (girl, on the left, cat)
> LLM
> annotate
> √×
> seed data
> relation
> classifier
> large data
> triplets
> relationship
> data
> A girl on the left of the cat.
> seed triplets
> dependency
> parser
> training data
> train
> filter
> noisy
> triplets

Figure 2: Dataset curation procedure. 

these annotations to identify and retain high-quality triplets. The overall process is illustrated in Fig. 2. Following the process, we compiled a dataset containing around 970,000 samples, filtered from MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014), SBUCaption (Or-donez et al., 2011), CC3M (Sharma et al., 2018), CC12M (Changpinyo et al., 2021) and Visual Genome (VG) (Krishna et al., 2017). 

2.2 Model Architecture 

The proposed model employs a dual image text encoder architecture that incorporates both tex-tual and visual inputs, which is illustrated in Fig.3. Specifically, a pretrained vision model is employed to encode image inputs and extract visual features, while a text encoder processes textual inputs. For the model to be aware of objects and their rela-tionships in the scene, the vision model also takes object regions as inputs, which are extracted based on the triplet in the textual description, while the text encoder processes the SVO features. The SVO structure in the textual inputs is then mapped to the object interactions in the image through contrastive learning. We elaborate on each component below. 

2.2.1 Textual Features 

The textual input to the model consists of a sen-tence describing the scene and an extracted SVO triplet. To generate textual representations that emphasize the objects and their relationships, the SVO structure, composed of the subject s, relation 

v and object o, is embedded together with the in-put sentence. Using the positional information of the tokens corresponding to the subject idx s, rela-tionship idx v, and object idx o within the sentence, the model outputs individual representations for each part of the triplet, which are then aggregated using mean pooling followed by a linear projec-tion to produce a unified representation of the SVO 20809 A kitten stands on the keyboard                   

> (kitten ,stands on ,keyboard )
> Box Positions
> Vision
> Model
> (kitten ,sleeps under ,keyboard )
> A kitten sleeps
> under keyboard
> LLM generated
> negative sample
> A small cat steps on the keyboard
> (cat ,steps on ,keyboard )
> Box Positions
> ROI
> Features
> ROI
> Feature
> ROI features ROI features
> SVO features SVO features
> Contrastive Loss
> Contrastive Loss
> A small cat steps on the keyboard
> (cat ,steps on ,keyboard )
> Language Models
> Visual Features
> Vision
> Model
> ROI features
> image features
> SVO features
> sentence features
> negative feature
> anchor
> positive feature
> SVO features
> sentence features
> Triplet Loss
> SVO Retrieve

A B1. 

> 2.
> 3.
> Text
> Model

Figure 3: The overall architecture of the proposed method. Part 1 shows positive sample construction process using SVO textual similarity; part 2 shows inter-sample contrastive loss between positive samples; part 3 shows negative sample construction for triplet loss. Altogether, part A shows inter-sample training process, and part B shows intra-sample training. 

relationship within the scene, denoted by rsvo , as shown in following equations and the upper part of part 2 in Fig.3. 

rsent = fu(sent ) (1) 

rs, r v, r o = rsent [idx s, idx v, idx o] (2) 

ˆrsvo = MeanPooling (rs, r v, r o) (3) 

rsvo = W ˆrsvo + b (4) Where fu denotes the text model and sent refers to the sentence description. The textual representation is the concatenated representation of the sentence features and the SVO features, as shown in Eq. (5) and the upper right of part B in Fig.3. 

u = Concat (Pool (rsent ), r svo ) (5) 

2.2.2 Visual Features 

For each image input, the Regions of Interest (ROI) corresponding to the subject and object in the im-age are first extracted, based on the object and sub-ject in the SVO structure of the textual description. Each ROI is then encoded by the vision model fv to obtain an ROI feature. Similar to (Tan and Bansal, 2019), positional information is incorporated into the ROI features by combining the embeddings of their box position, as described in Eq. (6) , Eq. (7) and lower part of part 2 in Fig.3. 

ˆrroi = fv(ROI ) + Embed (P osition ROI ) (6) 

rroi = W ˆrroi + b (7) The model’s overall image representation is the concatenated representation of the image features and the ROI features, described in Eq. (8) and the lower part of part B in Fig.3. 

v = Concat (fv(image ), r roi ) (8) 

2.3 Training Objectives 2.3.1 Inter-sample Contrastive Learning 

We employ inter-sample contrastive learning to im-prove the model’s representation of SVO structures in both textual and visual spaces. The inter-sample contrastive learning aims to pull the embedding of similar SVO structures in different samples close in the representation space, improving the model’s ability to recognize similar object relationships in various scenarios. The inter-sample contrastive loss is shown in Eq. (9) and described in part 2 of Fig.3. 

Lu = −

N∑

i=1 

N∑

j=1 

log exp( sim (ui, u j )/τ )

∑2N −1

k=1 exp( sim (ui, u k)/τ )

(9) Where u is the textual features described in Eq. (5) .The inter-sample loss for the visual features is cal-culated similarly. 

2.3.2 Intra-sample Contrastive Learning 

To maintain cross-modal alignment during inter-sample contrastive learning, we adopt an intra-20810 sample contrastive loss. Instead of using an in-batch contrastive loss with the sample’s caption as the positive and other captions in batch as negatives, we incorporate a triplet loss to allow the model to better distinguish between different relationships of the same objects in the scene. The triplet loss is shown in Eq.(10) and indicated in part B of Fig.3.          

> Ltriplet = max
> (
> 0,∥v−u∥22− ∥ v−u′∥22+α
> )

(10) where v is the visual features of the sample, u is the textual feature of the sample’s caption, u′ is the textual feature of the sample’s negative feature. The overall loss for a sample is a linear addition of 

Lu, Lv and Ltriplet .

2.3.3 Positive and Negative Sample Construction 

In inter-sample learning, positive pairs are image samples retrieved based on the textual similarity of their SVO triplets; negative samples are other in-batch samples. For the triplet loss in intra-sample learning, the image feature is used as the anchor, the positive sample is its corresponding text, while the negative is a textual description with similar objects and scenes but an opposite relationship. To obtain negative samples that satisfy this constraint, simply retrieving from the dataset is often insuffi-cient. Therefore, given the textual description of the anchor image and its SVO triplet, we use LLM to generate an opposing description that retains the same subject and object but conveys an inverse re-lationship. The opposite description together with its triplet are then used as the negative sample. 

3 Experiments 

3.1 Datasets CLEVR Dataset (Johnson et al., 2017): To test our hypothesis that CLIP struggles with spatial rea-soning in both text and image, we use a controlled dataset inspired by CLEVR. We generate scenes and textual descriptions containing two objects of controlled visual features and consistent shapes (cube and sphere), placed in one of eight spatial configurations: front, behind, left, right, front-left, front-right, behind-left, and behind-right. We input the image-text pairs into the model and visualize the resulting embeddings using t-SNE (Van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008). Sample images are shown in Fig.4b. 

VSR Dataset (Liu et al., 2023): To further examine the proposed model’s spatial understanding ability              

> Model Params Accuracy
> Finetuned
> VisualBERT (Li et al., 2019) 111 M 51.0 ViLT (Kim et al., 2021) 111 M 63.0 LXMERT (Tan and Bansal, 2019) 208 M 61.2
> Full zero-shot
> CLIP-ViT-H-14 (w/ prompting) 1 B 54.5
> SA-CLIP 151 M 57.8
> Table 1: Evaluation results on the VSR zero-shot split .

quantitatively, we use the Visual Spatial Reasoning (VSR) dataset, which includes 6,940 images and 66 distinct spatial relations. The task is to classify whether a caption correctly describes the spatial arrangement in the image. We evaluate the model on the zero-shot test set (1,222 samples) using accuracy as the metric. 

DoTA (Yao et al., 2022): For real-world evalua-tion, we test the model’s anomaly detection ability on road traffic videos from the DoTA dataset, fo-cusing on non-ego (non-self-induced) anomalies. From the test set, 597 relevant samples are se-lected and grouped into three anomaly interaction types: vehicle-vehicle (VV), vehicle-person (VP), and vehicle-obstacle (VO). ROC-AUC is used as the evaluation metric. 

3.2 Evaluation Results Spatial Understanding Ability In CLEVR scenes, where the visual features of the objects are controlled, the only distinguishing factor is their spatial relationship. Therefore, the degree to which a model forms distinct clusters in its representa-tions reflects its ability to capture spatial differ-ences. As shown in Fig.4, CLIP fails to distinguish between these relationships. In contrast, SA-CLIP, pretrained on the curated dataset, effectively cap-tures spatial distinctions, producing clear clusters in both visual and textual embeddings. This is fur-ther supported by results on the VSR test set in Table 1, where SA-CLIP surpasses CLIP-ViT-H-14 in zero-shot performance without careful prompt-ing and with significantly fewer parameters, and performs comparably to fully finetuned baselines. The contributions of each model component are evaluated through an ablation study, as shown in Table 3 in Appendix B. 

Traffic Anomaly Detection Results The evalua-tion results on the DoTA testset are shown in Table 2. The proposed model achieves superior zero-shot 20811 Visual Spatial Relationship Representation Textual Spatial Relationship Representation (a) Visualization results for the CLIP model. Visual Spatial Relationship Representation 

> Textual Spatial Relationship Representation

(b) Visualization results for the SA-CLIP model. 

Figure 4: The visualization of spatial relationships in the generated CLEVR scenes. 

Methods VV VP VO 

Finetuned 

AnoPred (Liu et al., 2018) 64.9 64.9 64.2 AnoPred +Mask (Liu et al., 2018) 66.0 64.0 58.8 FOL-STD (Yao et al., 2019) 70.8 69.7 63.8 FOL-Ensemble (Yao et al., 2022) 73.2 71.2 65.2 TTHF (Liang et al., 2024) 71.3 64.3 69.9 SA-CLIP 71.6 72.1 58.0 

Zero-shot 

CLIP-ViT-B-32 (Radford et al., 2021) 49.7 49.8 50.0 

SA-CLIP 56.8 58.2 52.1 

Table 2: AUC on the DoTA testset. Best performance is marked in bold ; second-best is underlined. 

anomaly detection ability over the vanilla CLIP model and remains competitive with SOTAs. No-tably, it performs well in detecting VP anomalies but worse in VO cases. Further analysis reveals that this is due to the reliance on the object detector, as the model’s performance is closely related to the quality of region-of-interest. 

4 Conclusion 

In this work, we address CLIP’s limitations in spa-tial and action understanding by introducing SA-CLIP, pretrained on a curated dataset focused on these relationships in both images and text. SA-CLIP outperforms vanilla CLIP in spatial action understanding and also proves effective in the real-world task of road traffic anomaly detection. 

Limitations 

This work has three main limitations. First, due to the contrastive training objective, the model lacks generative capabilities and thus relies on predefined textual knowledge in downstream tasks. While this limits flexibility, it also enables efficient inference. Second, it remains unclear whether the model truly learns to understand the semantic relationships be-tween regions of interest in the images and the corresponding textual SVO triplets, or if it simply relies on mapping representations of seen instances for inference. We plan to conduct a qualitative study on the curated data to enable a more thorough understanding of the model’s behavior. Finally, the model heavily depends on an off-the-shelf object detector to identify subjects and objects, making its performance sensitive to detection accuracy. 

References 

Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. 2021. Conceptual 12m: Pushing web-scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , pages 3558–3568. Lijie Fan, Dilip Krishnan, Phillip Isola, Dina Katabi, and Yonglong Tian. 2024. Improving clip training with language rewrites. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 36. Zhaopeng Gu, Bingke Zhu, Guibo Zhu, Yingying Chen, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. 2024. Anomalygpt: Detecting industrial anomalies using large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 1932–1940. Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross Girshick. 2017. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2901–2910. Wonjae Kim, Bokyung Son, and Ildoo Kim. 2021. Vilt: Vision-and-language transformer without convolu-tion or region supervision. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pages 5583–5594. PMLR. Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin John-son, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. 20812 2017. Visual genome: Connecting language and vi-sion using crowdsourced dense image annotations. 

International journal of computer vision , 123:32–73. Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2019. Visualbert: A sim-ple and performant baseline for vision and language. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03557 .Rongqin Liang, Yuanman Li, Jiantao Zhou, and Xia Li. 2024. Text-driven traffic anomaly detection with temporal high-frequency modeling in driving videos. 

IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology .Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision– ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13 , pages 740–755. Springer. Fangyu Liu, Guy Emerson, and Nigel Collier. 2023. Visual spatial reasoning. Transactions of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics , 11:635–651. Wen Liu, Weixin Luo, Dongze Lian, and Shenghua Gao. 2018. Future frame prediction for anomaly detection– a new baseline. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 6536–6545. Hui Lv and Qianru Sun. 2024. Video anomaly detection and explanation via large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05702 .Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara Berg. 2011. Im2text: Describing images using 1 million captioned photographs. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 24. Xuran Pan, Tianzhu Ye, Dongchen Han, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. 2022. Contrastive language-image pre-training with knowledge graphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:22895–22910. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PMLR. Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. 2018. Conceptual captions: A cleaned, hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic im-age captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2556–2565. Hao Tan and Mohit Bansal. 2019. Lxmert: Learning cross-modality encoder representations from trans-formers. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5100–5111. Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine learning research , 9(11). Jianyi Wang, Kelvin CK Chan, and Chen Change Loy. 2023. Exploring clip for assessing the look and feel of images. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 2555–2563. Yu Yao, Xizi Wang, Mingze Xu, Zelin Pu, Yuchen Wang, Ella Atkins, and David Crandall. 2022. Dota: unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in driving videos. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence .Yu Yao, Mingze Xu, Yuchen Wang, David J Cran-dall, and Ella M Atkins. 2019. Unsupervised traffic accident detection in first-person videos. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 273–280. IEEE. Luca Zanella, Willi Menapace, Massimiliano Mancini, Yiming Wang, and Elisa Ricci. 2024. Harness-ing large language models for training-free video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition , pages 18527–18536. 

A Training Details 

Dataset Curation We used spaCy 1 to get the de-pendency tree from the image captions. To extract spatial and action relationships, we composed rules focusing on the prepositional and verbal phrases. The rules start by checking the POS tag of the root node and its child nodes to determine the subject for the sentence, and recursively looking for POS pat-terns that satisfy the desired phrases from the root node. We selected captions from the MSCOCO dataset as seed data to obtain seed triplets, which contain less noise compared to web-collected data. The seeds were annotated by GPT-4o 2 to obtain bi-nary labels for the parsing correctness, and a binary classifier was trained on the annotated data using bert-base-uncased model which was then used to filter high-quality extractions. 

Training Settings We initialize the weights of SA-CLIP text and vision models using CLIP-ViT-B-32. During training, we adopt the locked tuning strategy and freeze the vision model. We use a learning rate of 5e-4 with AdamW optimizer and set batch size to 512, which corresponds to 1,024 

> 1https://spacy.io/
> 2https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/

20813 image-text pairs in each step, and train the model for 30,000 steps on the curated dataset using one NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80GB memory. The pretrained SA-CLIP was then used in the following downstream tasks and evaluations. 

B Ablation Details 

We evaluate the contribution of model compo-nents to relationship understanding using the VSR dataset and examine the impact of pretraining on the curated dataset for anomaly detection. The results are shown in Table 3. SVO indicates inter-sample training using textual SVO triplets; ROI indicates inter-sample training using visual ROI features; Triplet loss indicates intra-sample train-ing using both textual and visual features.                                 

> Pretrain SVO ROI Triplet Loss Accuracy
> w/o ✗✓✓53.5 w/o ✓✗✓54.5 w/o ✗✗✓53.1 w/o ✓✓✗51.1 w/o ✓✓✓54.7 w/ zero-shot ✓✓✓57.8 w/ + finetune ✓✓✓57.9
> Table 3: Ablation results on VSR dataset. w/o denotes without pretraining on the curated relationship dataset; finetune denotes training on the target dataset.

Table 3 shows that incorporating inter-sample contrastive learning improves the model’s spatial relationship understanding by improving the accu-racy score on the VSR dataset compared to only using triplet loss. However, without the triplet loss, the model could not match texts with images, lead-ing to a drastic drop of accuracy. 

C Traffic Anomaly Detection Evaluation Details 

We use a text-driven method to detect anomalies based on the SA-CLIP model. Specifically, we first summarize the domain knowledge into a compre-hensive hierarchy of traffic anomaly descriptions, under the assistance of domain experts. Then, we compute the similarity between the tex-tual features from the anomaly description and the visual features of the frame to be evaluated using the model to decide if a frame contains anomaly. Specifically, given the structured description D of traffic anomaly, the anomaly scenes Da and normal scenes Db are represented by the subcategories in the hierarchical knowledge, and the binary clas-sification problem for the anomaly detection task is decomposed into matching the visual features of a frame to the textual features of the structure node describing the abnormal and normal scenes. The final anomaly score for a frame fn is calcu-lated through the additive decomposition over all the descriptions as follows: 

score (fn) = 1

|D(a)|

∑

> d∈D(a)

(sim (ud, ˆzn)) (11) Where d is a description from abnormal scene de-scriptions, and u is the textual representation of the description. By inspecting the similarity score between the frame and each description, descrip-tions that best match the scene can be identified, thereby providing insight into the model’s decision for anomaly. 20814