Title: CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14586v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:38:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
## CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 

XIPING LI, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

AIER YANG, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

JIANGHONG MA ∗, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

KANGZHE LIU, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

SHANSHAN FENG, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China 

HAIJUN ZHANG, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

YI ZHAO, Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

The rapid expansion of gaming industry requires advanced recommender systems tailored to its dynamic landscape. Existing Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based methods primarily prioritize accuracy over diversity, overlooking their inherent trade-off. To address this, we previously proposed CPGRec, a balance-oriented gaming recommender system. However, CPGRec fails to account for critical disparities in player-game interactions, which carry varying significance in reflecting players’ personal preferences and may exacer-bate over-smoothness issues inherent in GNN-based models. Moreover, existing approaches underutilize the reasoning capabilities and extensive knowledge of large language models (LLMs) in addressing these limitations. To bridge this gap, we propose two new modules. First, Preference-informed Edge Reweighting (PER) module assigns signed edge weights to qualitatively distinguish signif-icant player interests and disinterests while then quantitatively measuring preference strength to mitigate over-smoothing in graph convolutions. Second, Preference-informed Representation Generation (PRG) module leverages LLMs to generate contextualized de-scriptions of games and players by reasoning personal preferences from comparing global and personal interests, thereby refining representations of players and games. Experiments on two Steam datasets demonstrate CPGRec+’s superior accuracy and diversity over state-of-the-art models. The code is accessible at https://github.com/HsipingLi/CPGRec-Plus. CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Recommender systems ; Information extraction ; Personalization; Additional Key Words and Phrases: video game recommendation, accuracy-diversity tradeoff, personal preferences, long-tail games 

ACM Reference Format: 

Xiping Li, Aier Yang, Jianghong Ma, Kangzhe Liu, Shanshan Feng, Haijun Zhang, and Yi Zhao. 2018. CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights confirmation email (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 43 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

> ∗

Corresponding author Authors’ Contact Information: Xiping Li, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China, lihsiping@gmail.com; Aier Yang, Harbin Insti-tute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, yangaier0920@gmail.com; Jianghong Ma, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, majianghong@hit. edu.cn; Kangzhe Liu, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, kangzheliu@foxmail.com; Shanshan Feng, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, victor_fengss@whu.edu.cn; Haijun Zhang, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, hjzhang@hit.edu.cn; Yi Zhao, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, zhao.yi@hit.edu.cn. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. © 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. Manuscript submitted to ACM Manuscript submitted to ACM 1

> arXiv:2604.14586v1 [cs.IR] 16 Apr 2026

2 Xiping Li et al. 

1 Introduction 

Recommender systems, pivotal in the customization of digital media content, have gained significant traction across a spectrum of industries, including e-commerce [19, 20, 30, 31, 33, 66], news [21, 50, 53, 68, 70, 76, 83, 98], and music [15, 23, 39, 40, 54, 59, 60, 78, 92]. Notably, the gaming sector has witnessed an extraordinary surge in recent years. A compelling example is provided by the data from SteamDB 1, which indicates a remarkable proliferation of games on the Steam platform: by 2024, the total number of game titles released had reached 14,310, representing an astonishing 33-fold increase over the past decade. This expansive selection of games highlights the substantial potential and the pressing need for the development of recommendation algorithms tailored for the gaming industry. These algorithms are poised to elevate user engagement and bolster financial performance for platforms, developers, and publishers alike, thus creating a symbiotic relationship. The domain of game recommendation studies has recently attracted considerable academic attention, primarily focusing on developing accuracy-oriented recommender systems to provide tailored game suggestions [5, 7, 12, 28, 58, 89]. Despite the considerable advancements these models have achieved in enhancing accuracy, they usually neglect the essential diversity of the recommendation lists, raising concerns about the filter bubble effect [25, 36, 52, 82], where users are confined to a narrow selection of popular games. This limitation may curtail users’ exposure to a variety of perspectives and potentially exacerbate pre-existing biases. By integrating diversity into recommendations, the user experience can be significantly enriched, introducing fresh and unexpected choices that broaden horizons and cater to a wider demographic. Against this background, the domain of game recommendation studies is currently facing several key obstacles: 

• Limitations of Accuracy-Focused Methods. Traditional accuracy-centric game recommendation algorithms [3, 5, 12, 58] emphasize transformantions from spatial domain but underutilize rich categorical game data. No-tably, games with similar genres can originate from various publishers and development studios, which signif-icantly influence user preferences. SCGRec [89] leverages category-based connections within game graphs to improve accuracy but relies on single-category associations, which may not always reflect true game similarities, potentially reducing recommendation accuracy. 

• Challenges in Diversity-Focused Methods. Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based diversity-focused methods have introduced techniques like dynamic neighbor sampling [91, 103], neighbor selection [90], and BPR loss modifications [62] to enhance diversity. However, these approaches face two challenges: (1) complexity risks and suboptimal use of item details in neighbor modeling, and (2) the challenge of long-tail distribution in the spread of messages. Neighbor sampling strategies can become overly intricate or sparse, neglecting key item features like categories. Additionally, most methods ignore item popularity, disproportionately favoring popular items and limiting exposure to niche or long-tail games. 

• Balancing Accuracy and Diversity. The trade-off between accuracy and diversity is a persistent challenge, as these objectives often conflict. Accuracy-focused methods like BPR loss [74, 79, 89] refine models using negative examples, while diversity-oriented methods employ loss rescaling or likelihood adjustments [11, 90, 94, 103]. However, these approaches predominantly favor one objective, grappling with the achievement of a harmonious accuracy-diversity balance. In prior work [41], we have addressed the outlined challenges by introducing a novel model, termed Category-based and Popularity-guided Video Game Recommendation (CPGRec). As part of that study, we explored a strategy 

> 1https://steamdb.info/stats/releases/ Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 3for constructing a graph structure by explicitly encoding the semantic information of game categories and popularity into the graph. Particularly, (1) when it comes to accuracy, based on the local smoothness of GNNs, CPGRec retains links exclusively between games that share a strong similarity in their categories, emphasizing the rationale for inferring content similarity from category similarity. (2) Regarding diversity, CPGRec allows information to flow freely between games across different categories, breaking the representation clustering of same-category games in high-dimensional space. Furthermore, by limiting the influence of popular game nodes while emphasizing their propagation capability, CPGRec facilitates the widespread dissemination of feature information for long-tail games. (3) Overall, regarding the trade-off between accuracy and diversity, CPGRec infers the relationship between representations and popularity information based on the rating scores of negative samples extracted from the BPR loss, allowing for the reweighting of BPR loss. Experimental results demonstrate that CPGRec outperforms baseline models in both accuracy and diversity. Despite its success, CPGRec neglects the disparities among observed historical player-game interactions, i.e. , it assumes that all these interactions reflect the players’ interest equally. However, in real-world scenarios, it is more reasonable to acknowledge the disparities of historical interactions, as they may have different importance in reflecting the player’s personal preferences. Intuitively, a player’s personal preferences are more pronounced in their historical interactions that significantly differ from those of the broader player base, rather than in interactions that show indis-tinguishable interest from global interests, considering both positive (interest) and negative (disinterest) aspects (which is analyzed in detail in Section 5.3). Based on this, two points should be highlighted: (1) Considering CPGRec’s em-ployment of graph convolutional layers with non-interaction-specific edge weights in bipartite graphs, ignoring these disparities in interactions may cause the smoothness of GCNs ( i.e., low-pass filtering in the spectral domain, which leads the adjacent nodes’ representations to become similar gradually) to become a trigger, leading to suboptimal mod-eling of players and games, as well as the resulting representations. (2) Furthermore, although the effectiveness of Large Language Models (LLMs) has been demonstrated in existing works, their great potential in filling the above gap, such as their rich knowledge about the game and powerful reasoning ability for understanding the above disparities of player-game interactions, has not yet been explored. To address these problems, we newly propose two modules in this study. They both incorporate both the dwelling time and average ratings, which respectively reflect the personal interest and public interests, to refine the represen-tation of player-game interactions. First , we design a module, namely Preference-informed Edge Reweighting (PER) , an edge reweighting method with sign design to address the above-mentioned over-smoothing risk arising from the neglect. Both the sign and edge weight are proposed to model the personal preferences indicated by histor-ical interactions, where the sign qualitatively reflects whether significant interest or disinterest is indicated in each interaction, while the edge weight further quantitatively measures the extent of significant preference. Specifically, a two-level approach is adopted: (1) Fisher Distribution-based Sign Decision : Using the Fisher statistic and Fisher distribution, we compare personal and global interests, uncovering both interests and disinterests, which inform the directional flow of messages on each edge, i.e. , the sign of messages. (2) Information Content-based Volume Evalu-ation : We introduce the concept of “information content” [37, 42, 67, 69] to quantify the significance of each interaction, thereby determining the magnitude of propagated messages. Second , inspired by the outstanding performance of exist-ing recommender systems that integrate LLMs, CPGRec+ further proposes a Preference-informed Representation Generation (PRG) module. PRG leverages the broad knowledge as well as powerful reasoning capabilities to gener-ate game descriptions and player descriptions as supplementary representations to polish game representation while further capturing the personal preferences of players. Particularly, PRG operates in two steps: (1) Rating-informed Game Description Generation : This step leverages the broad knowledge of LLMs by explicitly instructing them to 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

4 Xiping Li et al. reason from the average rating of each game, which is highlighted by our designed game prompt. This ensures that the generated descriptions effectively capture and reflect the global interest of the general players toward the game. (2) 

Preference-informed Player Description Generation : This step utilizes the reasoning capabilities of LLMs, explic-itly instructing them to infer player preferences by comparing personal interests with global interests. Jointly, these two preference-informed modules prioritize interactions that better reflect player interest to solve these aforemen-tioned problems, thereby improving the accuracy of our enhanced model, CPGRec+. Experimental results confirm that CPGRec+ outperforms CPGRec and remains competitive with state-of-the-art benchmarks. Building upon our previous work [41], this study presents the following contributions: 

• We extend CPGRec by newly incorporating both Preference-informed Edge Reweighting (PER) and Preference-informed Representation Generation (PRG), enabling finer-grained modeling for player-game historical inter-actions and personalized preferences. This integration empowers the system’s capability of delivering more tailored and satisfactory recommendations. 

• We propose a methodology to map video-game-related distributions to standard normal distributions using the Box-Cox transformation, which facilitates deeper theoretical analysis of personal preferences embedded within historical interactions and is experimentally validated through hypothesis testing, providing a robust foundation for future game recommendation research. 

• We propose a novel approach to enhance recommender systems by leveraging LLMs to generate game descrip-tions based on global interests, and generate player descriptions by reasoning individual preferences from com-paring personal interest and global interest, subsequently embedding these descriptions to refine player and game representations for improved recommendation quality. 

• Experimental results highlight the superior accuracy of the enhanced model, CPGRec+, while maintaining the diversity strengths of CPGRec, thereby attaining an ideal equilibrium for the trade-off task. 

2 RELATED WORK 2.1 Video Game Recommendation 

The escalating growth of the video game industry has drawn significant scholarly interest in the field of video game recommendation algorithms. Initial scholarly investigations primarily focused on approaches grounded in Collabora-tive Filtering (CF) and Content-Based Filtering (CBF). Anwar et al. presented a CF strategy that addresses the distinct profiles of games and users for the purpose of personalized game endorsements [3]. BharathiPriya et al. expanded on this by merging CF and CBF to deduce implicit hierarchies, with a focus on elements such as the duration of play [5]. Pérez-Marcos et al. , in a related approach, proposed a hybrid recommendation framework for gaming, drawing on methodologies from the music sector to optimize the usage of playtime [58]. Recently, there has been a discernible trend towards exploring innovative deep learning methodologies for game recommendation studies. These innovative strategies have consistently surpassed conventional methods, which are largely based on implicit user feedback. A case in point is the comprehensive study by Cheuque et al. , which evaluated the traditional Factorization Machine, DeepNN and hybrid DeepFM [12]. Their outcomes, notably when utilized with data from the Steam platform, indicated that DeepNN and DeepFM mod-els outperformed the FM model. The integration of GNNs into game recommender systems has also gained considerable traction. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) excel at capturing intricate connections and dependencies in graph-based 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 5data [2, 24, 35, 49, 57, 73, 80, 81, 85, 86, 94–96], positioning them as a strong choice for advancing recommendation sys-tems in the gaming sector. Yang et al. introduced SCGRec, a novel system that uses a GNN architecture to incorporate game context and social interactions [89]. 

Discussion. CPGRec+ apart from prior research in two key aspects: (1) Unlike traditional game recommendation models overlook the disparities of player-game historical interactions, CPGRec+ deeply mines the rich semantics of interaction-level to provide more accurate recommendations. Building on our earlier work [41], it integrates inter-category linkages within the graph structure and employs the Fisher distribution and entropy metrics to enhance player modeling by analyzing personal preferences from historical interactions. Besides, CPGRec+ further leverages the extensive knowledge and advanced reasoning capabilities of LLMs to refine game and player representations, incor-porating global interests and conducting a comparative analysis between individual and global interests, respectively. (2) In contrast to prior studies that often overlook diversity, leading to homogeneous recommendations, CPGRec+ incorporates both accuracy and diversity, ensuring a more balanced and varied recommendation output. 

2.2 Diversified Recommendation 

Pioneers like Ziegler et al. [105] initially brought the concept of diversity into the domain of recommender systems. This sparked extensive scholarly exploration into diversifying recommendation algorithms. Yin et al. [93] delved into diver-sity challenges within session-based recommender systems with a thorough study. Liang et al. [43]’s EDUA employs a dual-path network with adaptive balancing and dual-metric learning to boost both the accuracy and diversity of recom-mendations. Zheng et al. ’s DGCN, a strategy based on GCN [35], boosts diversity by selecting neighbors, reweighting samples, as well as the employment of adversarial learning [103]. Ye et al. [91]’s DDGraph employs a diversifying se-lector to update the user-item graph, ensuring neighbor diversity. Yang et al. [90]’s DGRec uses a submodular function for diverse neighbor selection and employs multi-layer attention and adjusts loss weights to glean more detailed in-sights from higher-order neighbors. The EXPLORE framework [14] presents a probabilistic user-behavior model that maximizes recommendation diversity while maintaining relevance, balancing user engagement and exploration. 

Discussion. Collectively, the above studies advance the incorporation of diversity in recommender systems. How-ever, most of these works sacrifice accuracy for diversity, use complex dynamic methods inefficiently, and inadequately leverage game category information for neighbor selection. To this end, our recently proposed CPGRec boosts recom-mendation accuracy by tightly linking games, enhances diversity by connecting varied game categories and leveraging popular games for long-tail visibility, and balances both through a novel negative-sample reweighting approach. 

2.3 LLM for Recommendation 

Recent research has explored the application of LLMs to enhance recommendation systems in various ways [44]. A-LLMRec proposes an efficient LLM-based recommender system that leverages collaborative knowledge from pre-trained CF-RecSys to excel in both cold and warm scenarios [34]. CoLLM introduces an innovative LLMRec approach that explicitly integrates collaborative information by encoding it from traditional collaborative models and align-ing it with the LLM’s input text token space [100]. CUP addresses the challenge of sparse user interactions by using Transformer-based representation learning and selecting informative cues from review texts to construct concise user profiles for recommendations [75]. KAR proposes an open-world knowledge-augmented recommendation framework that acquires reasoning knowledge on user preferences and factual knowledge on items from LLMs [84]. RLMRec introduces a model-agnostic framework that enhances existing recommenders with LLM-empowered representation 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

6 Xiping Li et al. learning to capture intricate semantic aspects and address challenges like scalability and text-only reliance [61]. SAGCN harnesses the sentiment analysis capabilities of LLMs to uncover semantic aspect-aware interactions from user reviews, enhancing the accuracy and interpretability of conventional recommendation methods [45]. 

Discussion. Although these latest methods have attempted to leverage the rich knowledge of LLM to generate rich descriptions for users or items, or to encode collaborative filtering signals into representations, they still have some key deficiencies. (1) Existing LLM-based recommender systems often overlook the importance of average ratings, which reflect the preferences of a large number of players, in the process of generating detailed game descriptions. This omission may lead to game descriptions that fail to reflect the aspects most relevant to players’ interests. While a game’s description may accurately portray its content and initially appear to align with a player’s preferences—prompting them to select it—its actual content may fall short of expectations, as indicated by a persistently low average rating. In such cases, despite a superficial alignment based on textual description alone, the game should not be recommended, as the collective feedback from the broader player community reveals a fundamental mismatch. (2) Existing works fail to fully harness the powerful reasoning capabilities of LLMs to extract individual preferences from historical interaction data, particularly by using dwelling time and average ratings as key indicators. These two factors, when combined, provide valuable insights into a player’s unique interests, as discussed in Section 5.3. To overcome these limitations, CPGRec+ employs large language models (LLMs) to integrate average ratings and dwelling time into the prompting process, enabling the generation of refined game and player descriptions. By explicitly capturing both global player preferences and individual interests, this approach enhances the alignment between game content and user experience, leading to more accurate and personalized recommendations. 

3 Investigating GNN-based Video Game Recommendation 3.1 Preliminaries 

3.1.1 DEFINITION(Game Graphs with Raw Connections) . In this study, we explore the interconnections among video games by categorizing them based on three fundamental types of categories: genre, developer, and publisher. This framework enables the establishment of raw connections between games. Specifically, in a game graph with genre-based raw connections, a connection forms when two games share overlapping genres; similar approaches define connections based on shared developer and publisher affiliations. By identifying games linked through shared genre (g), developer (d), and publisher (p) characteristics, we create three separate game networks based on these categories, denoted as 𝒢 𝑔 , 𝒢 𝑑 , and 𝒢 𝑝 .

3.1.2 DEFINITION(Player-Game Bipartite Graph) . In game recommendations, we define a group of players as 

𝒰 = {𝑢 1, 𝑢 2, … , 𝑢 |𝒰 |} and a set of games as ℐ = {𝑖 1, 𝑖 2, … , 𝑖 |ℐ|}. The subset ℐ(𝑢) ⊂ ℐ signifies the games that the player 

u has played. To model these historical interactions between players and games, we construct a player-game bipartite graph, represented as 𝒢 = ( 𝒱 , ℰ), where 𝒱 = 𝒰 ∪ ℐ. An edge is established between player u and game i if the player has previously engaged with the game. 

3.1.3 Problem Statement . The central objective of this study is to develop a system for game recommendations for each player 𝑢 ∈ 𝒰 by generating a top K list of games, denoted as ℐ(𝑢) 𝐾 = {𝑖 (𝑢) 1 , 𝑖 (𝑢) 2 , ..., 𝑖 (𝑢) 𝐾 }, which player u has not yet engaged with. Furthermore, this study introduces a multifaceted task that integrates considerations of both accuracy and diversity, requiring that the recommended lists of 𝐾 games not only match the interests of the players but also maintain sufficient diversity. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 7

3.2 Discovering the Long-tail Nature of Video Games 

In various real-world recommendation scenarios, such as short videos, movies, and products, user feedback on items is a critical reflection of user interest. This feedback is often quantified through metrics such as user clicks, downloads, and purchase counts, serving as proxies for item popularity within the recommendation framework. The long-tail effect describes the significant imbalance in the popularity distribution among items. Specifically, a limited number of items capture the majority of user engagement, while a substantial proportion of items, commonly referred to as “long-tail items”, receive minimal attention. The long-tail effect can adversely affect user satisfaction with recommender systems by impairing their ability to model user preferences effectively. This phenomenon arises because popular items, characterized by extensive histori-cal interactions with a broad user base, intensify the high-dimensional similarity representations between these items and users. Consequently, popular items tend to dominate the ranking process, overshadowing long-tail items. Thus, a significant challenge for recommender systems is disrupting this cycle and ensuring long-tail items are recommended with sufficient frequency despite the prevailing long-tail effect. We highlight that the evident long-tail effect in video games is a crucial motivation and significant practical founda-tion for this study. Specifically, the following intuitive depiction and quantitative analysis of the long-tail distribution observed on the Steam platform provide an illustration of the long-tail phenomenon. 

Intuitive depiction : As demonstrated in Fig. 1(a), games are organized in descending order based on the number of players to effectively illustrate the long-tail phenomenon. This phenomenon is characterized by (1) a limited number 

of highly popular games, often referred to as the “head” , which dominate the market, and (2) a significantly larger number of less popular games, known as the “long tail” , each commanding smaller individual shares. 

Quantitative analysis : Building on the concept of long-tail phenomenon, we propose the statistic Top Ratio 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) 

to quantitatively capture the long-tail characteristics of video games. This statistic is defined as: 

𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) = # of top-𝑝 popular games’ players 

# of all games’ players , (1) where 𝑝 is a fraction in [0.1,1] with increments of 0.1. It is evident that 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) represents the cumulative share of the top-𝑝 most popular games on Steam; thus, a larger 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) for a smaller 𝑝 indicates a more pronounced long-tail effect. Additionally, we introduce Δ𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) , defined as 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) − 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝 − 0.1) , to show the growth of 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) as 𝑝 increases. The 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) and Δ𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) presented in Fig. 1(b) illustrate the significant long-tail property of Steam video games. (1) Even when 𝑝 is small (specifically, limited to 0.3), 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) achieves a high value of 0.93, indicating that the most popular games account for a substantial majority of the total player base. (2) As 𝑝 increases , the incremental gain in 

𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) diminishes sharply. These two observations quantitatively provide an intuitive understanding of the long-tail distribution characteristic of Steam video games. 

3.3 Discovering the Categorical Semantics of Video Games 

The categorical information of games is intricately linked to finer details of game content such as visual and musical styles, containing rich semantics and therefore profoundly influencing players. This enables category information to serve as a form of prior knowledge and empower the inference that the representations of games affiliated with similar categories should be positioned closer together in the high-dimensional space, and vice versa, which can be classified as one of the common ideas for Content-Based Filtering (CBF) [4, 17, 87]. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

8 Xiping Li et al.   

> (a) Games sorted in descending order of num-ber of players.
> (b) A quantitative depiction based on
> 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝), Δ𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) .Fig. 1. The long-tail phenomenon in the number of players across all games within Steam platform, with quantitative analysis via
> 𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) and Δ𝑇 𝑅(𝑝) .

Following such ideas, GNNs have become one of the most commonly used basic frameworks in the field of recom-mender systems, one of the reasons being that they can explicitly exploit the above-mentioned category information to learn game representations in a spatial way, including by building edges based on the category information. Specif-ically, a general approach [11, 89, 103] is to establish a connection between any two items on the item graph based on a specific category, provided that they share similarities in this category. For example, RIP-Trilogy (casual, indie) and RoboBlitz (action, indie) are linked via the shared “indie” category. However, the above strategy is limited by the uncertain reliability of category semantics—when category similarity fails to reflect true content similarity, it introduces noise, degrading recommendation quality. To mitigate this, our previous work [41] introduced strict connections, requiring item pairs to share similarities in two categories to ensure stronger content alignment, in contrast to the raw connections used in conventional approaches. For instance, Counter-Strike: Source and Day of Defeat: Source (both action games developed by Valve) exhibit high content similarity, unlike Amnesia: The Dark Descent, which, despite being categorized as action, has distinct horror-themed graphics and puzzle-based gameplay. To validate the effectiveness of strict connections, we analyze the Steam network by comparing edge quantity, Euclidean distance, and cosine similarity of game description embeddings under raw and strict connections. Descrip-tions are generated using Qwen2.5 [88] for contextual understanding and M3-Embedding [9] for capturing semantic meaning—both chosen for their strong performance, accessibility, and cost-effectiveness. As shown in Fig. 2(a), intro-ducing a second category condition significantly reduces edge quantity, filtering out noisy connections and enhancing CBF signal quality. In Fig. 2(b), the larger main diagonal elements indicate that strict connections link games with more similar content, as they exhibit smaller Euclidean distances. Likewise, Fig. 2(c) shows larger main diagonal elements, confirming higher cosine similarity and stronger content alignment under strict connections. 

4 Review of CPGRec 

This section reviews our model CPGRec proposed in conference work [41], which is composed of four essential mod-ules: Stringency-improved Game Connection (SGC), Connectivity-enhanced Neighbor Aggregation (CNA), Popularity-guided Edges and Nodes Reweighting (PENR), and Combined Training with Negative-sample Score Reweighting (NSR). As these methods have been detailed in prior work [41], this study provides only a concise overview. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 9  

> (a) Quantity of edges (b) Average euclidean distance (c) Average cosine similarity Fig. 2. Figure (a) presents the number of edges in the Steam game network. Figures (b) and (c) show the average Euclidean distance and cosine similarity of game description embeddings, respectively. These descriptions are generated using a large language model (LLM), and embeddings are obtained via an embedding model. The main diagonal elements reflect the Steam game network based on raw connections, while other elements are based on strict connections.

4.1 Stringency-improved Game Connection 

As detailed in Section 3.3, category information is rich in semantics. Since games within the same category are expected to share similar content, effective game representations should capture this insight. Category information thus serves as a key semantic guidance in video game modeling. Based on this insight, the concept of strict connections is proposed to preserve connections only between games that share at least two categories among genre, developer, and publisher. This approach provides a more solid guarantee for the rationality of our inference from category similarity to the similarity of learned representation. Subsequently, LightGCN [26] with category-wise self-attention [77] is employed to learn the representation, which is defined as follows: 

𝑒 𝐶𝑎 𝑖 = Graphwise Attention (𝑒 𝑔&𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑒 𝑔&𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑒 𝑑&𝑝 𝑖 ), (2) where 𝑒 𝑔&𝑑 𝑖 , 𝑒 𝑔&𝑝 𝑖 , and 𝑒 𝑑&𝑝 𝑖 denote the learned representations obtained using LightGCN on 𝒢 𝑔&𝑑 , 𝒢 𝑔&𝑝 , and 𝒢 𝑑&𝑝 ,the three game graphs with strict connections defined in Section 3.1.1, respectively. 

4.2 Connectivity-enhanced Neighbor Aggregation 

To enhance diversity, we promote message propagation and aggregation across different game categories on a game graph constructed by strengthening the game graph’s connectivity. Specifically, we firstly construct a game graph 𝒢 𝐶𝑜 

where neighboring games are only required to share at least one common category but are allowed to differ significantly in others. For instance, adjacent games might share the same genre but have different developers and publishers. Second, to boost cross-category message interaction, we apply multi-layer LightGCN for message propagation and aggregation within 𝒢 𝐶𝑜 , and use an attention mechanism to weight embeddings from different layers, reducing over-smoothing risks. Third, we introduce a layer-wise reweighting parameter: 

𝑤 𝑙 = 1 − (𝑘 − 𝑙)𝛽, (3) where 𝑤 𝑙 is the reweighting parameter for the 𝑙 -th layer, 𝑘 is the number of LightGCN layers, and 𝛽 is the decay param-eter assigning higher weights to deeper layers’ embeddings. Specifically, 𝑤 𝑙 weights the 𝑙 -th layer’s game embedding 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

10 Xiping Li et al. to emphasize those from deeper layers, which capture messages from more distant and diverse games. Formally, the embedding of game 𝑖 is obtained by: 

𝑒 𝐶𝑜 𝑖 = Layerwise Attention (𝑤 1𝑒 (1) 𝑖 , 𝑤 2𝑒 (2) 𝑖 , ..., 𝑤 𝑘 𝑒 (𝑘) 𝑖 ), (4) where 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 is the output embedding of game 𝑖 from the 𝑙 -th layer. 

4.3 Popularity-guided Edges and Nodes Reweighting 

To emphasize diversity, the aim of this module is to create a situation where, although under normal circumstances, long-tail game nodes on player-game bipartite graphs have insufficient connectivity to influence the final learned player representation. In contrast, with the design of this link, in the alternating process of message propagation and aggregation, once messages from long-tail games flow through popular games, they can be widely disseminated to player nodes with the help of the latter’s advantageous connectivity; at the same time, the influence of popular game nodes themselves should also be limited. To achieve this, we increase the weights of out edges from popular games and those of long-tail game nodes, while decreasing the weights of popular game nodes. Formally, the edge weight function Θ𝑃𝑜 𝑒 (⋅) is specified as follows: 

Θ𝑃𝑜 𝑒 (𝑖) = { Θℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑒 𝑖 ∈ ℐℎ𝑜𝑡 

1 𝑖 ∉ ℐℎ𝑜𝑡 

, (5) and similarly a node weight mapping Θ𝑃𝑜 𝑛 (⋅) is defined as: 

Θ𝑃𝑜 𝑛 (𝑖) = ⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩Θℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑛 𝑖 ∈ ℐℎ𝑜𝑡 

1 𝑖 ∉ ℐℎ𝑜𝑡 ∪ ℐ𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 

Θ𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑛 𝑖 ∈ ℐ𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 

, (6) where ℐℎ𝑜𝑡 and ℐ𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 are respectively the sets of popular games and long-tail games. Then, multiple graph convolution layers which integrate the aforementioned reweighting mechanism are characterized by: 

𝑒 (𝑙+1) 𝑢 = 1√|𝒩 𝑢 |√|𝒩 𝑢 | 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 + ∑ 

> 𝑖∈ 𝒩 𝑢

Θ𝑃𝑜 𝑒 (𝑖)Θ 𝑃𝑜 𝑛 (𝑖) √|𝒩 𝑢 |√|𝒩 𝑖 | 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 , (7) 

𝑒 (𝑙+1) 𝑖 = Θ𝑃𝑜 𝑛 (𝑖) √|𝒩 𝑖 |√|𝒩 𝑖 | 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 + ∑ 

> 𝑢∈ 𝒩 𝑖

1√|𝒩 𝑖 |√|𝒩 𝑢 | 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 . (8) Here, 𝒩 𝑖 denotes the set of neighbors for game 𝑖 , while 𝒩 𝑢 denotes the set for player 𝑢 . The terms 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 and 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 are the embeddings output by the 𝑙 -th layer of LightGCN for game 𝑖 and player 𝑢 , respectively. After processing through 

𝑘 layers, the embeddings for player 𝑢 and game 𝑖 in this module are determined by the following calculation: 

𝑒 𝑃𝑜 𝑢 = 𝑒 (𝑘) 𝑢 , 𝑒 𝑃𝑜 𝑖 = 𝑒 (𝑘) 𝑖 . (9) 

4.4 Combined Training with Negative-sample Score Reweighting 

The key consideration in delivering a satisfying gaming experience to players is achieving a balance between accuracy and diversity. The first module (SGC) and the last two modules (CNA, PENR) proposed above form the accuracy-oriented and diversity-oriented modules of our framework, respectively. To integrate these aspects, CPGRec adopts a weighted combination method governed by learnable parameters 𝑤 𝐶𝑎 , 𝑤 𝐶𝑜 , 𝑤 𝑃𝑜 to obtain the final representations for 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 11 each player 𝑢 and game 𝑖 , which is defined as 

𝑒 𝑢 = 𝑒 𝑃𝑜 𝑢 ,𝑒 𝑖 = 𝑤 𝐶𝑎 𝑒 𝐶𝑎 𝑖 + 𝑤 𝐶𝑜 𝑒 𝐶𝑜 𝑖 + 𝑤 𝑃𝑜 𝑒 𝑃𝑜 𝑖 ,𝑤 𝐶𝑎 + 𝑤 𝐶𝑜 + 𝑤 𝑃𝑜 = 1, 

(10) where 𝑤 𝐶𝑎 , 𝑤 𝐶𝑜 , 𝑤 𝑃𝑜 are the weights for the embeddings of game 𝑖 obtained in modules SGC, CNA, and PENR, respec-tively. By adjusting these weights, we can adapt the model to meet various requirements. Moreover, CPGRec further enhances both accuracy and diversity by refining the rating scores for negative samples to facilitate more efficient learning from samples, which is expressed as: 

> ∼

𝐿 𝐵𝑃𝑅 = − ∑

> 𝑢∈ 𝒰 ,𝑖∈ ℐ(𝑢), 𝑗∉ ℐ(𝑢)

log 𝜎(𝑟 𝑢,𝑖 − ∼

𝑟 𝑢,𝑗 ) + 𝜆 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 ‖Θ‖ 22, (11) where 𝜎(⋅) is the sigmoid function, 𝑟 𝑢,𝑖 = 𝑒 𝑢 ⋅𝑒 𝑖 is the rating score of positive sample 𝑖 , 𝜆 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 serving as a hyper-parameter is the weight of the normalization term (following the general setting of existing recognized works [26, 89, 90], it is set to be fixed), and ∼

𝑟 𝑢,𝑗 = 𝑚 ⋅ 𝜎(𝑟 𝑢,𝑗 ) ⋅ 𝑟 𝑢,𝑗 , (12) is the reweighted rating score of negative sample 𝑗 , with 𝑚 controlling the reweighting intensity. From the perspective of enhancing accuracy , a negative sample predicted with a high rating score could be de-ceptive, i.e. , it can easily be mistaken for a positive sample. Thus, the increased loss through negative-sample score reweighting compels an improvement in the model’s recognition capabilities, aiming to achieve more accurate predic-tions in such cases. From the perspective of promoting diversity , a low score assigned to a negative sample implies substantial dissim-ilarity between that sample and players in terms of their representations. This could indicate limited interactions due to the game’s poor exposure to players, suggesting it might be a long-tail game. By increasing the rating score, this module enhances their chances of being recommended. 

5 Motivation for New Module 5.1 Preliminary: Smoothness Nature of GCNs 

In the field of graph learning, the concept of smoothness refers to a property of GNN models ( e.g. , Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)). It means that the representations learned by a GNN-based model with smoothness of nodes that are close to each other on a graph ( i.e. , connected or in close proximity) tend to be similar ( e.g. , their cosine similarity is much higher, or their Euclidean distance is much lower). The vast majority of GNN-based models, especially the most widely used GCN, possess the property of smoothness, which has a dual nature: (1) Smoothness can be leveraged to capture commonalities between nodes. When nodes are connected or part of the same neighborhood in a graph, they often share similar characteristics or roles. By enforcing smoothness, GNNs can effectively propagate and aggregate information between neighboring nodes, leading to more coherent and consistent representations; (2) However, ex-cessive smoothness can lead to the problem of over-smoothness, where the representations of nodes may become too similar, losing the distinctiveness needed for effective learning and prediction. In CPGRec, smoothness is utilized to capture the commonalities between games sharing similar categories in the module SGC, based on the belief that games with similar categories are expected to have similar content, effectively 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

12 Xiping Li et al. enhancing the recommendation accuracy. Nonetheless, as mentioned earlier, the direct application of GCN layers may lead to the over-smoothness issue. To better leverage smoothness while mitigating over-smoothness, it is essential to understand the smoothness property of GCN. From a spatial domain perspective, smoothness is relatively straightforward to understand, as feature interactions occur through message propagation and aggregation between adjacent nodes, resulting in greater similarity among neighboring nodes. However, this intuitive perspective is insufficient, as it fails to adequately explain why certain GNNs, particularly those designed from the spectral domain, hold the potential to address over-smoothness. Therefore, a spectral perspective is provided in Appendix A for a deeper understanding of smoothness. 

5.2 Motivation 1: Smoothness of GCN Layer within CPGRec 

The GCN [26, 35] serves as a foundational framework in CPGRec, facilitating representation learning for players and video games within game graphs and the bipartite graph. Nevertheless, it is essential to recognize that the role of GCN in CPGRec is not uniformly advantageous. On one hand, the smoothness property of GCNs enhances game representation learning by effectively capturing the rich semantics of various categories in the context of the SGC module. Discussions in Section 3.3 introduce the rationality of the belief that categorically similar games should share similar representations, which serves as a prin-ciple that offers guidance to game modeling, and can be effectively implemented through the smoothness property of GCNs. Conversely, the smoothness property introduces the risk of compromising accuracy in module PENR, which is based on the player-game graph. The tendency for representations of players and games to converge towards similarity poses a significant challenge to the effectiveness of CPGRec, as it neglects the consideration of diverse preferences and behavioral patterns among different players. Furthermore, while popularity-guided weights are introduced to enhance long-tail influence and diversify recommendations, the experimental results of the ablation study in our conference work [41] have demonstrated that they may even impair accuracy, albeit to an acceptable degree. Potential reasons are that these popularity-guided weights are not conducive to learning complex interaction patterns in the player-game context, as the popularity information solely reveals nothing about the player-game interactions.   

> (a) Dwelling time of all players for game Elec-tronic Super Joy
> (b) Dwelling time of the player 320 ’s for histor-ical games Fig. 3. Two concrete examples for illustrating the disparities of historical interactions.
> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 13 

5.3 Motivation 2: Disparities of Historical Interactions in Player-Game Graph 

In this section, we conduct several data explorations to illustrate the problems arising from edge weights derived from the PENR module (introduced in Section 4.3) in the context of the player-game bipartite graph. This analysis reveals the underlying causes of over-smoothness and highlights the motivations and foundations of this study. Specifically, we discuss the unequal importance and rich semantics of historical interactions from two perspectives: 

• From the viewpoint of a specific game , the duration of engagement by historical players exhibits considerable variation, indicative of differing levels of enthusiasm among players for that game. 

• From the viewpoint of a specific player , engagement time across historical games varies significantly, reflecting the player’s unique preferences for different games. To provide a more intuitive illustration, we offer concrete examples for both scenarios: from the game perspective, we use the game Electronic Super Joy as an example; from the player perspective, we focus on the player with ID=320 .These examples are depicted in Fig. 3. Fig. 3.(a) shows the dwelling time of all 76 players for the game Electronic Super Joy . Despite their observed histor-ical interactions with the game, dwelling times exhibit considerable variability. Notably, one player has amassed an impressive 177,260 hours of playtime, while another player has not engaged with the game at all since its acquisition. We contend that only the former’s substantial engagement accurately reflects genuine interest, whereas the latter’s inactivity does not. Fig. 3.(b) illustrates the Z-score-normalized dwelling times for the player with ID=320 across their 90 historical games. Although the player has interacted with these games, dwelling times vary significantly. For instance, after Z-score normalization, the player’s engagement with certain games approaches nearly 1.0, indicating a strong alignment with their interests. In contrast, a dwelling time close to 0.0 for other games suggests minimal engagement post-purchase, leading us to classify these games as unrepresentative of the player’s preferences. 

Summary. Considering the smoothness property of GCNs, neglecting the critical disparities in historical interac-tions can cause the representations of players and games to become overly similar, potentially hindering CPGRec’s capability to provide more accurate recommendations. To address this issue, we propose integrating a new module called Preference-informed Edge Reweighting (PER) , which aims to model the personal preference of each player by fac-toring in interaction-wise semantics, where both significant interest and disinterest are included. Moreover, current recommender systems fail to fully utilize LLMs’ potential in deeply mining players’ personal preferences. To bridge this gap, we introduce the Preference-informed Representation Generation (PRG) module, which leverages LLMs to en-hance the modeling of players’ preferences by refining game descriptions based on average ratings (global interest) and generating player descriptions through a comparative analysis of dwelling time (personal interest) and global interest. 

6 CPGRec+: Towards Preference-informed Recommendation 

In this section, we begin by analyzing the interest and disinterest in our study. Subsequently, we propose two novel modules, PER and PRG, to capture these preferences with edge reweighting and LLMs respectively. Both modules address the challenge of interaction disparities, while PER further mitigates the risk of over-smoothing inherent in CPGRec. Finally, we show the overview of the improved CPGRec+ model and its detailed analysis. 

Player’s preference. A player’s personal preference is manifested in the discrepancies between his or her pref-erence and those of the broader player base. Specifically, each historical interaction potentially reflects a player’s personal preference from two perspectives: (1) interest : a player may exhibit greater interest than the general player 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

14 Xiping Li et al. 

> Fig. 4. Illustration of the CPGRec+ framework, comprising three modules: Accuracy-driven module (Stringency-improved Game Connection, Preference-informed Edge Reweighting, and Preference-informed Representation Generation), Diversity-driven module (Connectivity-enhanced Neighbor Aggregation, Popularity-guided Edges and Nodes Reweighting), and Comprehensive module.

base on the observed interactions with a non-popular game, reflecting his or her personal interest in that game, in stark contrast to the general historical players of this involved game; (2) disinterest : conversely, a player may demon-strate significantly less interest than the general player in a popular game, indicating his or her disinterest. To this end, PER and PRG are proposed in this paper to detect these informative interactions, and leverage them to refine the representations of games and players. 

6.1 New Module: Preference-informed Edge Reweighting 

A player-game bipartite graph that neglects the disparities of observed player-game interactions is an under-improved modeling of player-game history relationships. This is because it does not fully consider real-world situations, leading to suboptimal collaborative filtering signals. Furthermore, such neglect may trigger problems arising from the inherent smoothness of GCN, which results in increased similarity among node representations. These factors ultimately lead to suboptimal modeling for players and games. To address this problem, we propose the PER module, which solves this 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 15 problem in two steps. First, inspired by existing works in anomaly detection field to address over-smoothing problem [16, 22, 71], along with recent advancements for identifying noisy signals within complex data [46, 48], we design a sign decision mapping for player-game edges within the bipartite graph to differentiate between interest and disinterest of player. Then, we further introduce information content [69] to carefully quantify the significant preferences identified in the previous step. 

6.1.1 Fisher Distribution-based Sign Decision. We propose introducing a sign decision mapping for edges within the player-game bipartite graph, which differentiates between interest and disinterest as revealed by each historical inter-action. Such sign mapping for messages can be seamlessly integrated into graph convolutional layers and has demon-strated efficacy in mitigating over-smoothness in the field of data mining, such as anomaly detection [16, 22, 71]. Specifically, we detect those interactions that show significant player preferences (including both interest and disin-terest) based on the involved dwelling time and the average ratings of the involved games. Then, we assign a positive sign to edges representing interest and a negative sign to those indicating disinterest. This approach allows us to con-vey messages with a positive sign through the former and messages with a negative sign through the latter. As a result, we expect a reduction in the high-dimensional representation similarities between players and the games they show significant disinterest in, while simultaneously increasing similarities with games they show significant interest in. To achieve this, we construct the sign mapping by employing both the dwelling time and average ratings as metrics. The reason for adopting them is that dwelling time revealed by each single historical interaction reflects this particular player’s interest in this specific game; in contrast, the average rating of this game reflects the interest of general players in this game. By comparing these two indicators, they jointly reflect the personal preference of this player indicated by each historical interaction. However, this raises two critical questions: 

• The dwelling time and average ratings should be from different spaces, prohibiting comparisons between them (our goal). How to transform dwelling time and ratings into the same space? 

• How can we define a method that compares dwelling time and average ratings to effectively infer the personal preferences of each player? To solve the first question, we propose to introduce the Box-Cox transformation [65]. Box-Cox transformation is a statistical method that can effectively map any input data into an approximately normal distribution while maintaining its relative relationship, and has been widely employed in various fields, such as anomaly detection [27, 102], fuzzy systems [99], and Monte Carlo denoising [64]. Then, we nest a Z-score normalization to further turn the data output by Box-Cox transformation into approximately standard normal distribution, which eventually maps both the dwelling time and average ratings to the same space (standard normal space). Formally, for any input data 𝑦 (i.e. , dwelling time or average ratings), the transformed data 𝑦 (𝜆 𝐵𝐶 ) is computed by: 

𝑦 (𝜆 𝐵𝐶 ) = {  

> 𝑦 𝜆 𝐵𝐶 −1 𝜆 𝐵𝐶

if 𝜆 𝐵𝐶 ≠ 0, 

ln (𝑦) if 𝜆 𝐵𝐶 = 0, 

(13) where 𝜆 𝐵𝐶 is a hyper-parameter that controls the skewness and kurtosis of the transformed distribution. It is worth clarifying that 𝜆 𝐵𝐶 is a hyperparameter that remains fixed during supervised learning rather than a learnable parameter, determining how close the transformed data are to a normal distribution. A range of methods have been proposed to 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

16 Xiping Li et al. estimate the optimal value of 𝜆 𝐵𝐶 [65], of which we leverage the implementation of Scipy 2 to obtain it automatically using maximum likelihood. Subsequently, the Z-score transformation is introduced to further turn 𝑦 (𝜆 𝐵𝐶 ) into 𝑧 by: 

𝑧 = 𝑦 (𝜆 𝐵𝐶 ) − 𝔼[𝑦 (𝜆 𝐵𝐶 )]√Var [𝑦 (𝜆 𝐵𝐶 )], (14) which approximately follows the standard normal distribution. 𝔼 and Var are the expectation and variance of data 

𝑦 (𝜆 𝐵𝐶 ), respectively. Moreover, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed composite mapping (Box-Cox trans-formation followed by Z-score normalization) in transforming dwelling time and average ratings into the same stan-dard normal space by employing One Sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test [1] in Section 6.4. The standard normality of the transformed data inspires us to design a comparison method to solve the second 

problem: modeling the personal preferences of each player. Specifically, Fisher [18] proposed the concept of Fisher distribution, which can be regarded as the square of the ratio of two independent standard normal distributions, and the distribution characteristics of Fisher distribution are clearly known. This allows us to use the square of the ratio between the transformed dwelling time and the average rating as the result of the comparison, and use Fisher distribution as the basis for measuring the significance of this comparison result, to obtain a qualitative comparison result. Formally, given that the observed dwelling time of player 𝑢 on game 𝑖 is denoted as 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 , and the average rating of game 𝑖 is denoted as 𝑟 𝑖 , we know that the mapped dwelling time 𝑇 for each video game and the mapped average ratings 

𝑅 of all games respectively follow a standard normal distribution, which are expressed as: 

𝑓 𝑇 (𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 ) = 1√2𝜋 exp (−𝑡 2𝑢,𝑖 ), 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 ∈ ℛ, (15) 

𝑓 𝑅 (𝑟 𝑖 ) = 1√2𝜋 exp (−𝑟 2𝑖 ), 𝑟 𝑖 ∈ ℛ. (16) According to the definition of Fisher distribution, the statistic 𝐹 = 𝑇 2 

> 𝑅 2

follows a Fisher distribution with parameters 

(𝑑 1, 𝑑 2) = (1, 1) [18], whose cumulative distribution function of 𝐹 is defined as: 

𝑃(𝐹 ≤ 𝑥) = ℐ 𝑥 𝑥+1 

( 12 , 12 ), (17) where ℐ is the regularized incomplete beta function as: 

ℐ𝑥 (𝑎, 𝑏) = 𝐵(𝑥; 𝑎, 𝑏) 𝐵(𝑎, 𝑏) , (18) 

𝐵(𝑥; 𝑎, 𝑏) = ∫

> 𝑥 0

𝑡 𝑎−1 (1 − 𝑡) 𝑏−1 𝑑𝑡. (19) Thus, we can directly obtain the upper quantile 𝑄 𝛼 ∈ ℛ of 𝐹 (hyper-parameter 𝛼 controls the significance level) and take it as a clear criterion for whether 𝑇 2 is significantly greater than 𝑅 2, considering 

𝐹 ≫ 𝑄 𝛼 ⟺ 𝑇 2 ≫ 𝑅 2, 𝐹 = 𝑇 2

𝑅 2 . (20) It is noteworthy that the condition 𝐹 ≫ 𝑄 𝛼 highlights the two very different cases 𝑇 ≫ 0, 𝑅 ≈ 0 and 𝑇 ≪ 0, 𝑅 ≈ 0 ,which respectively show the significant interest and disinterest of the player revealed in the particular interaction: 

> 2https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/stats.html Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 17 

• 𝑇 ≫ 0, 𝑅 ≈ 0 respectively indicate that the player has a strong interest for this game (indicated by a fairly long dwelling time) while the global interest of all players for this game is at a mediocre level (indicated by the average rating of the game), which together reflect the player’s significant interest in the game. 

• 𝑇 ≪ 0, 𝑅 ≈ 0 respectively indicate that the player has a strong disinterest for this game (indicated by a fairly short dwelling time) while the global interest of all players for this game is at a mediocre level (indicated by the average rating of the game), which together reflect the player’s significant disinterest in the game. This inspires us to construct the preference-informed sign mapping for the historical interaction between player 𝑢 and game 𝑖 by: 

𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑢, 𝑖) = ⎧⎪⎨⎪⎩1 if 𝐹 = 𝑡 2𝑢,𝑖 

> 𝑟 2𝑖

> 𝑄 𝛼 and 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 > 0, −1 if 𝐹 = 𝑡 2𝑢,𝑖 

> 𝑟 2𝑖

> 𝑄 𝛼 and 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 ≤ 0, 0 else ,

(21) which first determines whether each historical interaction shows a significant personal preference, and if so, determines whether the preference is interest or disinterest: if it is interest, a positive sign is given to increase the similarity between the player and game representations; if it is disinterest, a negative sign is given to explicitly reduce the similarity between the two. 

6.1.2 Information Content-based Volume Evaluation. Although preference-informed sign mapping provides a macro-scopic perspective on players’ personal preferences, there remains a need for a more detailed quantification of the disparities present in different historical interactions. Inspired by existing research [37, 42, 67], we propose to introduce information content [69] as the metric to solve this problem. As an important concept of information theory, information content I(⋅) quantifies the amount of surprise or unexpectedness associated with an observed event A, which is formally computed by: 

I(A) = − log (𝑃( A)), (22) where 𝑃( A) is the probability that A occurs. As seen, a rarer event A has higher information content I(A) since its probability 𝑃( A) is low, and vice versa. This enables us to quantitatively describe the intensity of each observed significant personal preference in a similar way. Specifically, for a historical interaction involving a player with an observed dwelling time of 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 and an observed game rating of 𝑟 𝑖 , the information content is defined as: 

I𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ) = − log 𝑃(𝑇 = 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 , 𝑅 = 𝑟 𝑖 ). (23) Given 𝑇 and 𝑅 are independent, we have 

𝑃(𝑇 = 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 , 𝑅 = 𝑟 𝑖 ) = 𝑃(𝑇 = 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 )𝑃(𝑅 = 𝑟 𝑖 ) (24) and 

I𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ) = − log 𝑃(𝑇 = 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 )𝑃(𝑅 = 𝑟 𝑖 ). (25) Eventually, the preference-informed edge weight Θ𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑢, 𝑖) is defined as: 

Θ𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑢, 𝑖) = 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑢, 𝑖) ⋅ I𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ), (26) 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

18 Xiping Li et al. which provides a detailed, interaction-focused characterization of each historical interaction. The PER algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1: Preference-informed Edge Reweighting 

Input: edge set ℰ, game average rating mapping 𝑅 , player dwelling time mapping 𝑇 , significance level 𝛼 

Output: preference-informed edge weight mapping Θ𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (e) for input edge e ∈ ℰ 

> 1

𝑄 𝑢 𝛼 ← 1−𝛼 𝛼  

> 2

for 𝑒 in ℰ do  

> 3

(𝑢, 𝑖) ← 𝑒  

> 4

𝑅 𝑖 , 𝑇 𝑢 ← 𝑅(𝑖), 𝑇 (𝑒)  

> 5

𝐹 ← 𝑇 2𝑢  

> 𝑅 2𝑖
> 6

𝐼 𝑇 ,𝑅 (𝑇 𝑢 , 𝑅 𝑖 ) ← − log ( 12𝜋 exp (−(𝑇 2𝑢 + 𝑅 2𝑖 ))  

> 7

if 𝐹 > 𝑄 𝛼 then  

> 8

if 𝑇 𝑢 > 0 then  

> 9

Θ𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑒) ← 𝐼 𝑇 ,𝑅 (𝑇 𝑢 , 𝑅 𝑖 ) 

> 10

else  

> 11

Θ𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑒) ← −𝐼 𝑇 ,𝑅 (𝑇 𝑢 , 𝑅 𝑖 ) 

> 12

else  

> 13

Θ𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑒) ← 0  

> 14

return Θ𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (e)

6.2 New Module: Preference-informed Representation Generation 

Large language models (LLMs) have been widely used in the field of recommender systems recently due to their rich knowledge and powerful reasoning ability. However, their potential for generating informative descriptions and comprehending historical interactions has yet to be fully leveraged in uncovering players’ personal preferences. To address this gap, this study first employs LLMs to generate game descriptions that emphasize players’ global interests, which are indicated by the average ratings of involved games. Subsequently, LLMs are further utilized to extract player descriptions that capture individual preferences. Finally, both types of descriptions are embedded into representations to refine player and game embeddings, enhancing the overall recommendation quality. 

6.2.1 Rating-informed Game Description Generation. PRG enables LLM to deeply understand the content of each game at a semantic level by constructing textual prompts that include key game information, such as the title, rating, price, and release time (since the comparison between ratings and time is not directly addressed here, the original 100-point rating scale is retained). Specifically, PRG directs the LLM to focus on deriving insights from the average rating, which reflects the preferences of the majority of players, serving as an indicator of global interest . This approach leverages the LLM’s capabilities in reasoning, natural language understanding, and generation to create high-quality textual descriptions for each game, which later facilitates further reasoning involving the joint evaluation of rating and dwelling time. Formally, PRG designs an input prompt 𝒫 (𝑖) 𝑔 for each game 𝑖 ∈ ℐ by combining two key components: (1) critical textual information about the game and (2) explicit instructions. The textual information includes the game title 𝛼 𝑔 ,the average rating 𝑟 𝑔 (as a reflection of global interest), and supplementary data such as price 𝑝 𝑔 and release date 𝑡 𝑔 .

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 19 The explicit requirements instruct the LLM to generate the description with particular emphasis on 𝑟 𝑔 , as it reflects the global interest of general player base for this game. This can be formally expressed as: 

𝒫 (𝑖) 𝑔 =⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩𝑓 𝑔 ([𝛼 𝑔 , 𝑟 𝑔 , 𝑝 𝑔 , 𝑡 𝑔 ]), if 𝑟 𝑔 , 𝑝 𝑔 , 𝑡 𝑔 exist ,𝑓 𝑔 ([𝛼 𝑔 ,̄ 𝑟 𝑔 , 𝑝 𝑔 , 𝑡 𝑔 ]), else if 𝑝 𝑔 , 𝑡 𝑔 exist ,𝑓 𝑔 ([𝛼 𝑔 , 𝑟 𝑔 ]), else if 𝑟 𝑔 exist ,𝑓 𝑔 ([𝛼 𝑔 ,̄ 𝑟 𝑔 ]), otherwise ,

(27) where 𝑓 𝑔 (⋅) is a game-specific function that combines the textual information with the explicit requirements into a single string. Missing game ratings are substituted with the average rating of available games, while missing supple-mentary information is omitted as it is non-essential. Based on this, a state-of-the-art LLM can be leveraged to generate high-quality description as textual representation in natural language for each game 𝑖 ∈ ℐ, which is expressed as: 

𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 = ℒℒℳ (𝒫 (𝑖) 𝑔 ), (28) where 𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 indicates the textual description of game 𝑖 , which highlights the global interest of players. In this study, the LLM Qwen2.5 [88] is utilized considering its excellent ability to understand context and generate human-like text. Additionally, building on the success of LLMs in generating user and item profiles in recommender systems [44, 97, 106], along with recent advancements in encoding textual semantics into numerical embeddings [47], we integrate an embedding model ℰℳℬ to map 𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 into a numerical semantic space. This complements the game representation, as expressed by the following equations: 

𝑒 𝒟  

> 𝑖

= ℰℳℬ (𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 ), 𝑒 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑖 = 𝑀𝐿𝑃 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 (𝑒 𝒟  

> 𝑖

), 𝑒 𝑖 = 𝑀𝐿𝑃 𝒟 −𝐼 𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔 𝑔 ([𝑒 𝑖 , 𝑒 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑖 ]), (29) where ℰℳℬ (M3-Embedding [9] is adopted due to its effectiveness in capturing semantic meaning) embeds the textual description 𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 for game 𝑖 into the numerical semantic space to obtain 𝑒 𝒟  

> 𝑖

, 𝑀𝐿𝑃 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 is a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [63] that aligns 𝑒 𝒟  

> 𝑖

from the semantic space with 𝑒 𝑖 from the original game representation space, and 𝑀𝐿𝑃 𝒟 −𝐼 𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔 𝑔 

updates the game representation 𝑒 𝑖 by integrating 𝑒 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑖 , encapsulating the LLM-derived knowledge about the game (with the MLP depth set to 2 by default in this study). It is acknowledged that MLP is not the only representation fusion method, as linear, gated fusion strategies are often considered as well. Therefore, to provide a more complete analysis, we provide a comparison across them in Section 7.7. Furthermore, we also provide an example in Appendix B (Fig. 8) that specifically shows how to generate a description for a game following the above steps. 

6.2.2 Preference-informed Player Description Generation. Furthermore, PRG leverages the meticulously generated game descriptions {𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 }𝑖∈ ℐ to construct personalized prompts aimed at deeply exploring players’ preferences by rea-soning from the comparison between the dwelling time and the average ratings of games. Specifically, PRG designs a personal prompt for each player, which includes the descriptions of its historical games, the personal interest of this player in these games (represented by the normalized dwelling time 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 ) and the global interest (represented by the normalized average rating 𝑟 𝑖 ). By explicitly instructing the LLM to compare personal and global interests as the 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

20 Xiping Li et al. primary focus, PRG compels the LLM to extract and highlight the most relevant information that reflects the player’s unique preferences from the previously generated high-quality game descriptions. It is worth noting that, since the rating and dwelling time obtained in Equation 14 have been carefully mapped to follow a standard normal distribution, they can be directly compared and serve as quantitative indicators of personal preference. This enables the LLM to interpret and understand these features more effectively. Formally, the structure of the input player prompt 𝑃 𝑝 for player-description generation is outlined as follows: 

𝒫 (𝑢) 𝑝 = 𝑓 𝑝 ([𝑓 ℎ𝑔 (𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 , 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 )]), 𝑖 ∈ ℐ(𝑢), (30) where 𝑓 ℎ𝑔 combines the generated game description 𝒟 (𝑖) 𝑔 with both the normalized dwelling time 𝑡 𝑢,𝑖 and average rating 𝑟 𝑖 ; 𝑓 𝑝 integrates all the historical games of player 𝑢 and explicitly requires the language model LLM to infer the player’s personal preferences by comparing time and average rating based on our analysis detailed in Section 5.3 and the transformed data obtained in Section 6.1. Then, with the help of LLM, we obtain the description for each player 𝑢 

by: 

𝒟 (𝑢) 𝑝 = ℒℒℳ (𝒫 (𝑢) 𝑝 ), (31) where 𝒟 (𝑢) 𝑝 indicates the textual description of player 𝑢 , emphasizing the personal interest of the player. In this context, we also utilize the LLM Qwen2.5 [88] to generate these descriptions. Similar to Equation 29, we use a state-of-the-art embedding model ℰℳℬ (i.e., M3-Embedding [9]) to integrate the preference-informed player description 𝒟 (𝑢) 𝑝 into the player representation by: 

𝑒 𝒟  

> 𝑢

= ℰℳℬ (𝒟 (𝑢) 𝑝 ), 𝑒 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑢 = 𝑀𝐿𝑃 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 (𝑒 𝒟  

> 𝑢

), 𝑒 𝑢 = 𝑀𝐿𝑃 𝒟 −𝐼 𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔 𝑝 ([𝑒 𝑢 , 𝑒 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 𝑢 ]). (32) Appendix B (Fig. 9) provides a specific example illustrating how to generate a description for a player following the above steps. 

6.3 Overview of CPGRec+ 

In summary, the two newly introduced modules (PER and PRG) attempt to bridge the gap resulting from our proposed model CPGRec’s insufficient consideration of the disparities of observed player-game historical interactions, where disparities refer to the different importance of each player’s interactions in reflecting this player’s personal interest. To solve this problem, both PER and PRG attempt to better model the personal preference of each player by deeply capturing the player’s interest or disinterest exhibited in each historical interaction. Methodologically, PER refines the modeling of player-game interactions by reweighting edges based on the comparison between personal interest and global interests, whereas PRG leverages LLMs to generate more informative game and player representations by explicitly guiding the model to reason from both the personal and global interests as key factors in preference inference. Although both the PER and PENR modules reweight the player-game edge weights, the newly proposed PER serves as an accuracy-driven module, whereas the PENR functions as a diversity-driven module. Collectively, these two mod-ules facilitate balance-oriented recommendations through the formulation of a balance-oriented edge weight de-fined as: 

Θ𝑅𝑊 𝑇 𝑒 (𝑒) = Θ 𝑃𝑟 𝑒 (𝑒) + Θ 𝑃𝑜 𝑒 (𝑒), (33) 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 21 which is employed in Equation 7 to replace the former edge weight Θ𝑃𝑜 𝑒 (𝑒) .The newly introduced PRG module, by contrast, harnesses the powerful generative and reasoning capabilities of LLMs, along with their rich knowledge, as a crucial source of supplementary information. This information is seam-lessly integrated into the representations of both games and players through Equations 29 and 32, ensuring that both 

global interests and the personal interests are effectively captured within the game and player representa-tions , respectively. As depicted in Fig. 4, the proposed framework, CPGRec+, consists of five core modules designed to deliver balance-oriented recommendations for players as follows: 

Accuracy-Driven Module (SGC+PER+PRG) : SGC module leverages cross-category associations to establish strict connections among games within the game graph, enhancing accuracy. By employing a comparison method based on the Fisher distribution and information content, PER captures player preferences from historical interactions that significantly indicate the personal preferences of players. Interaction-wise edge weights are then applied to the player-game graph to refine player modeling. Following a similar insight, PRG leverages LLMs to enrich player and game representations by incorporating complementary information, specifically, both the players’ average ratings (represent global interests) and the dwelling time (represent personal interests). First, it prompts LLMs to generate game descriptions that encapsulate global interest. Subsequently, it constructs detailed player descriptions by inferring personal preferences through a comparative analysis of individual interest and global interest. 

Diversity-Driven Module (CNA+PENR) : In contrast to SGC, CNA emphasizes diverse-category neighbors to strengthen the connectivity of the game graph, promoting diversity. Unlike PER, PENR adjusts the weights of nodes and edges in the player-game graph based on game popularity, transforming popular games into conduits for disseminating messages from long-tail games, thereby enhancing diversity. 

Comprehensive Module : It harmonizes accuracy and diversity by employing Combined Training with NSR. Together, these modules enable CPGRec+ to achieve a balance between accuracy and diversity in recommendations. 

6.4 Detailed Analysis of CPGRec+ 

In this section, we conduct a detailed analysis of CPGRec+, including both the validation of the standard normality of transformed dwelling time and average ratings involved in PER module and a case study for previously proposed PENR module. 

6.4.1 Validation of the Statistical Basis of PER Module. In this section, we employ the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test for one sample to validate the efficacy of applying Box-Cox and Z-score transformation in mapping the dwelling time and average ratings to the standard normal distribution. Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test (KS Test) for one sample estimates the likelihood that a given sample is drawn from a specified reference distribution. Specifically, the KS Test introduces the KS-statistic, formally defined as: 

𝐷 𝑛 = 𝑠𝑢𝑝 𝑥 |𝐹 𝑛 (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥)|, (34) where 𝑛 is the size of sample, and 

𝐹 𝑛 (𝑥) = # of sample points ≤ 𝑥 𝑛 (35) 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

22 Xiping Li et al. is the empirical cumulative distribution function, which measures the distance between the empirical distribution of the sample and that of the reference distribution, denoted as 𝐹 . According to the Kolmogorov theorem, √𝑛𝐷 𝑛 converges to the Kolmogorov distribution, whose cumulative distribution is given by 

𝐹 𝐾 (𝑥) = √2𝜋 𝑥 

> ∞

∑

> 𝑘=1

exp ( −(2𝑘 − 1) 2𝜋 2

8𝑥 2 ), (36) which quantifies the probability that the given sample originates from the reference distribution. In our analysis, the empirical sample consists of the dwelling times and average ratings transformed via Box-Cox and Z-score transformations, while the reference distribution is the standard normal distribution. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 5 and Table 1. Among the 2,675 Steam video games with varying player dwelling times, we examine the game Electronic Super Joy as a representative example. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the mapped dwelling times of players for Electronic Super Joy and the average ratings of all games closely resemble the standard normal distribution in terms of probability density, providing an intuitive perspective on the effectiveness of the transformations. Furthermore, as shown in Table 1, the p-values for dwelling time and average ratings are 0.5950 and 0.5024 , respectively, both of which exceed the commonly used significance level of 𝛼 = 0.05 . This indicates that the transformed data are statistically indistinguishable from the standard normal distribution .  

> Fig. 5. Illustration of the probability density of dwelling time of players of Electronic Super Joy and average ratings of all video games mapped by Box-Cox and Z-score transformations, which is intuitively highly close to standard normal distribution. Table 1. Experimental results of Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

Feature KS-statistic P-value Size of Sample Dwelling Time 0.0861 0.5950 76 Average Rating 0.0159 0.5024 2675 

6.4.2 Case Study for PENR Module. In our conference paper [41], we propose the PENR module, aimed at enhancing diversity by leveraging popular game nodes to propagate messages for long-tail games. This section includes a case study of the PENR module to provide a clearer and more intuitive understanding of its functionality. Consider a simplified scenario with only 2 video games and 2 players, denoted as 𝑖 0, 𝑖 1 and 𝑢 0, 𝑢 1, respectively. To show the role of PENR module in amplifying the influence of long-tail game nodes, we assume that 𝑖 0 is a long-tail game, while 𝑖 1 is popular. The existing historical interactions are (𝑢 0, 𝑖 0), (𝑢 0, 𝑖 1), (𝑢 1, 𝑖 1). Let 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 0 , 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 1 , 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 0 , 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 1 represent 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 23 the representations of 𝑢 0, 𝑢 1, 𝑖 0, 𝑖 1 respectively obtained from the 𝑙 -th layer. According to the PENR module’s definition, the operations of the graph convolutional layers are as follows: 

𝑒 (𝑙+1) 𝑢 1 = 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑢 1 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 1 + 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ ⋅ 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 1 , (37) 

𝑒 (𝑙+1) 𝑖 1 = 𝑛 ℎ ⋅ 𝐶 𝑖 1𝑖 1 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 1 + 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 1 + 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 1 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 0 , (38) 

𝑒 (𝑙+1) 𝑢 0 = 𝑛 𝑙 ⋅ 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 0 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 0 + 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 1 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 1 + 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑢 0 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 0 , (39) 

𝑒 (𝑙+1) 𝑖 0 = 𝑛 𝑙 ⋅ 𝐶 𝑖 0𝑖 0 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 0 + 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 0 ⋅ 𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 0 , (40) where the normalization term is defined as: 

𝐶 𝑎 𝑚 𝑏 𝑛 = 1√|𝑁 𝑎 𝑚 |√|𝑁 𝑏 𝑛 |, 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ {𝑢, 𝑖}, 𝑚, 𝑛 ∈ {0, 1}, (41) and 𝑒 ℎ = 𝜃 ℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑒 , 𝑛 ℎ = 𝜃 ℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑛 , 𝑛 𝑙 = 𝜃 𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑛 are popularity-guided weights for edges and nodes. Consequently, the repre-sentation for 𝑢 1 derived from the 3𝑟𝑑 layer could be obtained by recursion of Equation 6.4.2, formally denoted as: 

𝑒 (𝑙+3) 𝑢 1 = 𝐴𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 0 + 𝐵𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑖 1 + 𝐶𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 0 + 𝐷𝑒 (𝑙) 𝑢 1 , (42) where 

𝐴 = 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ𝑛 𝑙 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 0 , (43) 

𝐵 = 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ𝐶 2𝑢 1𝑢 1 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 + 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 2ℎ𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑖 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑢 1 , (44) 

+ 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 3ℎ𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 2𝑖 1𝑖 1 + 𝑒 2ℎ𝑛 2ℎ𝐶 3𝑢 1𝑖 1 + 𝑒 2ℎ𝑛 2ℎ𝐶 2𝑢 0𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 (45) 

𝐶 = 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑢 1 + 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 2ℎ𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑖 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 1 (46) 

+ 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ𝐶 𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 0𝑢 0 , (47) 

𝐷 = 𝐶 3𝑢 1𝑢 1 + 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ𝐶 𝑢 1𝑢 1 𝐶 2𝑢 1𝑖 1 (48) 

+ 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 2ℎ𝐶 2𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑖 1𝑖 1 + 𝑒 ℎ𝑛 ℎ𝐶 2𝑢 1𝑖 1 𝐶 𝑢 1𝑢 1 . (49) To explore the function of the PENR module in enhancing the influences of long-tail games, we define the influence index 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 to quantify the influence of each node on 𝑢 1:

𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 0 = 𝐴 𝐴 + 𝐵 + 𝐶 + 𝐷 , (50) 

𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 1 = 𝐵 𝐴 + 𝐵 + 𝐶 + 𝐷 , (51) 

𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑢 0 = 𝐶 𝐴 + 𝐵 + 𝐶 + 𝐷 , (52) 

𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑢 1 = 𝐷 𝐴 + 𝐵 + 𝐶 + 𝐷 . (53) (54) Based on Equation 6.4.2, we conduct the following case study as shown in Table 2 by varying the popularity-guided weights 𝑛 ℎ, 𝑛 𝑙 , 𝑒 ℎ. It is worth noting that 𝑛 ℎ = 𝑛 𝑙 = 𝑒 ℎ = 1 means that the PENR module is removed. From the results, there are several observations: 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

24 Xiping Li et al. 

> Table 2. Influence factors.

𝑒 ℎ/𝑛 ℎ/𝑛 𝑙 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 0 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 1 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑢 0 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑢 1

1/1/1 0.0747 0.3796 0.1966 0.3491 1/1/6 0.3263 0.2764 0.1432 0.2542 1/0.2/1 0.0864 0.2549 0.1922 0.4665 5/1/1 0.0486 0.6439 0.1280 0.1796 5/0.2/1 0.0966 0.3379 0.1912 0.3742 5/0.2/6 0.3908 0.2279 0.1290 0.2523 

• Effectiveness of Popularity-guided Reweighting: Compared to the scenario without PENR module ( i.e. 

𝑒 ℎ/𝑛 ℎ/𝑛 𝑙 = 1/1/1 ), the 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 0 with PENR module ( i.e. 𝑒 ℎ/𝑛 ℎ/𝑛 𝑙 = 5/0.2/6 ) significantly increases from 0.0747 

to 0.3908 , which proves the effectiveness of popularity-guided reweighting. 

• Increase of Long-Tail Game Node Weight: The setup 𝑒 ℎ/𝑛 ℎ/𝑛 𝑙 = 1/1/6 enlarges the effectiveness of long-tail game node 𝑖 0 by amplifying its node weight, resulting in an increase in the influence index 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 0 to 0.3263 ,while concurrently reducing the influence index of the popular game node 𝑖 1 by approximately 27.19% .

• Decrease of Popular Game Node Weight: The setup 𝑒 ℎ/𝑛 ℎ/𝑛 𝑙 = 1/0.2/1 reduces the node weight of the popular game 𝑖 1, thereby significantly constraining its influence; consequently, 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 1 decreases by about 32.85% ,while the influence index of all other nodes increase. 

• Increase of Popular Game Edge Weight: The setup 𝑒 ℎ/𝑛 ℎ/𝑛 𝑙 = 5/1/1 enlarges the weight of outgoing edges from the popular game node 𝑖 1, thereby enhancing its capacity to propagate messages. This transformation leads to an expansion of the influence of the popular game 𝑖 1.

• Combined Effect of Increasing Popular Game Edge Weight and Decreasing Popular Game Node Weight: 

The setup 𝑒 ℎ/𝑛 ℎ/𝑛 𝑙 = 5/0.2/1 further reduces 𝑛 ℎ compared to the last setup, thereby limiting the effectiveness of 𝑖 1, and resulting in a decrease in 𝐼 𝑁 𝐹 𝑖 1 by 47.52% .The aforementioned examples intuitively illustrate and substantiate the importance of the popularity-guided weight introduced by the PENR module. Together, these mechanisms enhance the influence of long-tail games while simulta-neously mitigating the predominance of popular games. 

6.4.3 Complexity Analysis of CPGRec+. In this section, we meticulously analyze the complexity of CPGRec+ to foster the potential real-world deployment of the framework. This includes not only the fine-grained complexity analysis of the multiple components but also the comparison between CPGRec+ and other state-of-the-art recommender systems. 

Complexity Analysis of Stringency-improved Game Connection (SGC) . As the first accuracy-driven mod-ule, SGC includes three essential steps: (1) constructing game graphs with stringency-improved game connections 

𝒢 𝑔&𝑑 , 𝒢 𝑔&𝑝 , 𝒢 𝑑&𝑝 , (2) game representation learning on 𝒢 𝑔&𝑑 , 𝒢 𝑔&𝑝 , 𝒢 𝑑&𝑝 with the LightGCN model, (3) graph atten-tion across multiple graphs. The following is a detailed complexity analysis of each of the above steps. Since the first step is completed before model inference, it will not be taken into account in the time complexity analysis. In the second step, we use the LightGCN model to learn node representations on each constructed strict graph. Since LightGCN performs one em-bedding propagation step, its time complexity is 𝑂(𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 |) , where |𝐸 𝑔&𝑑 |, |𝐸 𝑔&𝑝 |, |𝐸 𝑑&𝑝 | are the number of edges in the graphs 𝒢 𝑔&𝑑 , 𝒢 𝑔&𝑝 , 𝒢 𝑑&𝑝 , respectively, |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 | is the summation of |𝐸 𝑔&𝑑 |, |𝐸 𝑔&𝑝 |, |𝐸 𝑑&𝑝 | and 𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 is the feature 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 25 dimension of the game nodes. Specifically, this process involves an Embedding Propagation step and a Layer Combi-nation step, with time complexities of 𝑂(𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 |) and 𝑂(𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 |ℐ|) respectively. Since |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 | is usually greater than |ℐ|, the total time complexity of this step is 𝑂(𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 |) . In the third step, we apply Graph Attention Net-work (GAT) across the strict graphs 𝒢 𝑔&𝑑 , 𝒢 𝑔&𝑝 , 𝒢 𝑑&𝑝 to fuse the learned representations. The total time complexity of this step is 𝑂(| ℐ|𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 2 + |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 |𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 ). This can be attributed to the fact that GAT involves linear mapping for each of |ℐ| nodes and computing attention scores for each of |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 | edges, with time complexities of 𝑂(| ℐ|𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 2) and 

𝑂(|𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 |𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 ), respectively. As a result, the complexity of the SGC component is 𝑂(| ℐ|𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 2 + |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 |𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 ).

Complexity Analysis of Connectivity-enhanced Neighbor Aggregation (CNA) . CNA is the first diversity-driven module. Highly similar to SGC, it consists of three key steps: (1) constructing a connectivity-enhancecd game graph 𝒢 𝐶𝑜 , (2) game representation learning on 𝒢 𝐶𝑜 with 𝑘 -layers of LightGCN, (3) graph attention across multiple layers. Considering that the only difference is the number of layers of LightGCN used, by following the aforementioned detailed analysis process as follows, the complexity of CNA is 𝑂(| ℐ|𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 2 + 𝑘|𝐸 𝐶𝑜 |𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 ), where 𝑘 and |𝐸 𝐶𝑜 | are the number of the used LightGCN layers and that of edges within graph 𝒢 𝐶𝑜 , respectively. 

Complexity Analysis of Preference-informed Edge Reweighting (PER) . PER is the second accuracy-driven module as well as one of the newly proposed extensions. It involves two steps: (1) Fisher Distribution-based Sign Decision, (2) Information Content-based Volume Evaluation. Based on the dwelling time and the average rating data from the dataset, PER models a player’s personal preferences by assigning signed weights to historical player-game interactions, which are determined by comparing personal interest (dwelling time) against global interest (average game ratings) to detect both the significant interest and disinterest. It is worth highlighting the computational efficiency of the PER method. Since the calculation of its edge weights relies solely on static historical data, namely dwelling times and average ratings, these weights can be entirely pre-computed offline and remain constant during model inference. 

Complexity Analysis of Preference-informed Representation Generation (PRG) . PRG is the third accuracy-driven module and a newly proposed extention in this study, including (1) Rating-informed Game Description Gen-eration, (2) Preference-informed Player Description Generation, and (3) Representation Embedding and Integration. Conceptually, the process begins with constructing a prompt for each game and player, after which an LLM is invoked to generate their textual descriptions. Finally, a large embedding model converts these descriptions into numerical representations, which are subsequently fused with the existing node representations via MLP models. Notably, the representation embedding involved in steps (1) and (2), as well as partly in step (3), can be completed in advance; only the semantic alignment and fusion with MLP models, as shown in Equations 29 and 32, must be performed at inference time. This design significantly improves the recommendation efficiency of CPGRec+. Specifically, the complexity of alignment step with 𝑀𝐿𝑃 𝒟 −𝐴𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 is 𝑂((| ℐ|+| 𝒰 |)⋅(𝑑 𝑒𝑚𝑏 𝑑 ℎ +𝑑 ℎ𝑑 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 )) , respectively, where 𝑑 𝑒𝑚𝑏 is the embedding dimen-sion of the adopted embedding model ( i.e., of M3 in this study), 𝑑 ℎ and 𝑑 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 are the dimensions of output of the hidden layer and output layer, respectively. Furthermore, since 𝑑 𝑒𝑚𝑏 ≫ 𝑑 ℎ, the complexity of alignment methods can be simpli-fied to 𝑂((| ℐ| + | 𝒰 |) ⋅ (𝑑 𝑒𝑚𝑏 𝑑 ℎ)) . Similarly, the complexity of the integration step is 𝑂((| ℐ| + | 𝒰 |) ⋅ (𝑑 ℎ𝑑 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 )) . As a result, taking the aforementioned two steps into account, the total complexity of PRG component is 𝑂((| ℐ| + | 𝒰 |) ⋅ (𝑑 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑 𝑑 ℎ)) 

considering 𝑑 𝑒𝑚𝑏 ≫ 𝑑 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 .

Complexity Analysis of Popularity-guided Edges and Nodes Reweighting (PENR) . As the second diversity-driven module, PENR enhances long-tail game exposure by reweighting nodes and edges in the player-game bipartite graph based on popularity. The PENR weights are pre-computed offline from static popularity data and thus do not add to the inference time complexity. During inference, these weights are combined with PER weights and integrated 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

26 Xiping Li et al.    

> Table 3. Complexity comparison between our proposed CPGRec+ and state-of-the-art GNN-based recommender systems. In the comparison,  , × , and =indicate that the complexity of the model is lower than, higher than, and equal to CPGRec+, respectively.

Model CPGRec+ SCGRec DGCN DGRec MVGNN LightGCN Graph Convolution on Bipartite Graph yes yes yes yes no yes Complexity Comparison w/ CPGRec+ = × × ×    

into the LightGCN message-passing mechanism (Equation 33). This efficient application, an element-wise multipli-cation, does not increase the asymptotic complexity of the graph convolution. The overall complexity is therefore 

𝑂(|𝐸 𝑏𝑖 |𝑑 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 ), where |𝐸 𝑏𝑖 | is the number of bipartite edges and 𝑑 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 is the representation dimensionality. 

Overall Complexity of CPGRec+. In summary, the total inference time complexity of CPGRec+ is the summa-tion of its online components: 𝑂(| ℐ|𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 2 + (|𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 | + 𝑘|𝐸 𝐶𝑜 |)𝑑 𝑔𝑎𝑚𝑒 + (| ℐ| + | 𝒰 |)(𝑑 𝑒𝑚𝑏 𝑑 ℎ) + |𝐸 𝑏𝑖 |𝑑 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 ). In practical recommender system scenarios, the number of user-item interactions, |𝐸 𝑏𝑖 |, is typically several orders of magnitude larger than the number of item-item connections ( |𝐸 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡 |, |𝐸 𝐶𝑜 |) and the total number of nodes ( |ℐ| + | 𝒰 |). This leads to the following three key observations. 

• The PENR component is the primary computational bottleneck of CPGRec+ . This can be attributed to the fact that the complexity is dominated by the graph convolution on the player-game bipartite graph leveraged by PENR. 

• Newly introduced PER and PRG components are not only pivotal but also efficient components of CPGRec+ . They significantly enhance the balance-oriented recommendation capabilities without substantially increasing the framework’s online computational load. 

• CPGRec+ is a highly deployable framework achieving a favorable balance between performance and complexity . While achieving superior performance, CPGRec+ exhibits a complexity that is entirely on par with a wide range of state-of-the-art GNN-based recommender systems [26, 89, 90, 103], surpassed only by efficient the MVGNN [51] model that circumvents direct processing of the entire graph structure through meticulous designs. The comparison results are organized in Table 3. This is attributed to the extensive reliance on the user-item graph among these broad GNN-based recommender systems, which also serves as the primary computa-tional bottleneck for CPGRec+. Furthermore, CPGRec+ demonstrates even greater deployability compared to methods such as SURGE and DGRec, which depend on the dynamic construction of sequences or subgraphs dur-ing inference. Besides, in terms of designs, CPGRec+ also guarantees exceptional inference efficiency through its broad incorporation of lightweight LightGCN layers and a substantial volume of critical pre-computed weights. 

7 Experiments 

In this section, we conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate the performance of CPGRec+, focusing on its accuracy and diversity. 

7.1 Experimental Setup 

7.1.1 Dataset. As Steam is one of the largest video-game distribution platforms globally, its specialized datasets are notably representative, readily accessible, and have been extensively utilized in prior research. This motivates our use of two real-world Steam datasets as the empirical foundation for our experiments: (1) The first, which we denote as 

Steam I , is the dataset previously employed in CPGRec [41] and other established works [55, 89]; (2) following existing 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 27 works [13, 32], we further introduce a different version of steam data, designated as Steam II , which encompasses player-game interaction data spanning from October 2010 to January 2018, as well as a rich array of supplementary information like dwelling time, pricing details, average ratings, and game categorical information. Table 4 succinctly presents the basic statistics of Steam I and Steam II datasets, offering a clear overview of their features. 

> Table 4. Statistics of the Steam I and II datasets.

Dataset Steam I Steam II # Players 3,908,744 334,730 # Games 2,675 13,047 # Interactions 95,208,806 3,686,172 Genre Information    

Developer Information    

Publisher Information    

Dwelling Time    

Average Rating    

For Steam I, in accordance with the partition setting of previous studies [41], the observed historical interactions are split into train, valid, and test sets, following a ratio of 0.8/0.1/0.1 ; for Steam II, the splitting ratio is 0.5/0.05/0.45 .

7.1.2 Evaluation Metrics. For accuracy assessment, we employ NDCG@K, Recall@K, Hit@K , and Precision@K as our metrics; for diversity, in addition to Coverage@K and Entropy@K , which were employed in our previous conference work [41], we further introduce Conventional Coverage@K , Tail Coverage@K , and Tail@K defined as: 

Conventional Coverage @𝐾 = | ∪ 𝑢∈ 𝒰 ℐ(𝑢) 𝐾 ||ℐ| , (55) 

Tail Coverage @𝐾 = | ∪ 𝑢∈ 𝒰 (ℐ(𝑢) 𝐾 ∩ ℐ𝐿𝑇 )| |ℐ𝐿𝑇 | , (56) 

Tail @𝐾 = 1|𝒰 | ∑

> 𝑢∈ 𝒰

ℐ(𝑢) 𝐾 ∩ ℐ𝐿𝑇 

𝐾 , (57) where ℐ(𝑢) 𝐾 is the top-K recommended list for each user 𝑢 ∈ 𝒰 , and 𝐾 takes values in {5, 10} , and ℐ𝐿𝑇 is the set of long-tail games. More specifically, they are defined as the 20% of games with the lowest player counts in this study. It is crucial to note that Coverage@K and Entropy@K evaluate individual diversity, whereas Conventional Coverage@K 

assesses global diversity. Specifically, Coverage@K measures diversity across genres, developers, publishers, and their combined total in the top-𝐾 recommendations; Entropy@K evaluates the entropy of recommendation lists based on these categories; Conventional Coverage@K assesses the variety of unique video games present in the top-K recom-mendations. 

7.2 Baselines 

In order to thoroughly assess the performance of CPGRec+, we carried out comparisons against a variety of established recommender systems. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

28 Xiping Li et al. In terms of accuracy , we compared CPGRec+ with five models: the widely-used GNN-based model LightGCN [26], and the state-of-the-art recommender systems SURGE[8], SCGRec [89], MVGNN [51], and BIGCF [101], which leads accuracy-oriented recommender systems. In terms of diversity , CPGRec+ is evaluated in comparison to five distinguished diversity-focused models: MMR [6], EDUA [43], DDGraph [91], DGCN [103], and DGRec [90]. In terms of balance , EXPLORE [14] and the prior work CPGRec[41] were introduced as trade-off-focused baselines. 

7.3 Performance Evaluation 

Table 5. Accuracy-focus performance comparison of different accuracy-, diversity- and balance-driven recommender systems in terms of NDGC, Recall, Hit, Precision on Steam I. 

Methods NDGC Recall Hit Precision @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 Accuracy-driven Methods LightGCN 0.1861 0.2100 0.2452 0.3174 0.2849 0.3784 0.0637 0.0447 SURGE 0.3133 0.3521 0.4128 0.5340 0.4779 0.6361 0.1065 0.0753 BIGCF 0.3986 0.4271 0.5017 0.6053 0.6184 0.7296 0.1391 0.0915 MVGNN 0.4138 0.4452 0.4954 0.5916 0.6129 0.7183 0.1446 0.0957 SCGRec 0.4351 0.4660 0.5385 0.6311 0.6519 0.7535 0.1508 0.0969 Accuracy-focused CPGRec 0.4796 0.5000 0.5746 0.6387 0.6983 0.7659 0.1625 0.0989 Accuracy-focused CPGRec+ 0.4805 0.5029 0.5768 0.6413 0.6993 0.7674 0.1637 0.0993 

Diversity-driven Methods MMR 0.3259 0.3871 0.2768 0.3420 0.3522 0.4302 0.0684 0.0623 EDUA 0.3839 0.4072 0.4746 0.5545 0.5808 0.6936 0.1149 0.0826 DDGraph 0.3997 0.4298 0.4949 0.5883 0.6059 0.7094 0.1399 0.0894 DGCN 0.3732 0.4025 0.4536 0.5523 0.6056 0.7123 0.1129 0.0806 DGRec 0.3546 0.3982 0.4293 0.5434 0.5791 0.7126 0.1041 0.0786 Diversity-focused CPGRec 0.4285 0.4547 0.5168 0.5990 0.6390 0.7292 0.1469 0.0922 Diversity-focused CPGRec+ 0.4312 0.4570 0.5221 0.6029 0.6439 0.7322 0.1485 0.0930 

Balance-driven Methods EXPLORE 0.4126 0.4381 0.5002 0.5895 0.6187 0.7177 0.1398 0.0916 CPGRec (trade-off framework) 0.4320 0.4547 0.5168 0.5990 0.6390 0.7292 0.1469 0.0922 CPGRec+ (trade-off framework) 0.4422 0.4691 0.5347 0.6192 0.6590 0.7473 0.1538 0.0967 

Table 6. Accuracy-focus performance comparison of different accuracy-, diversity- and balance-driven recommender systems in terms of NDGC, Recall, Hit, Precision on Steam II. 

Methods NDGC Recall Hit Precision @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 Accuracy-driven Methods LightGCN 0.0505 0.0579 0.0396 0.0625 0.1765 0.2566 0.0409 0.0324 SURGE 0.1913 0.2287 0.1804 0.2691 0.5926 0.7438 0.1612 0.1229 BIGCF 0.2403 0.2886 0.2267 0.3431 0.6782 0.8459 0.1991 0.1554 MVGNN 0.2427 0.2902 0.2281 0.3467 0.6813 0.8492 0.2008 0.1571 SCGRec 0.2391 0.2864 0.2243 0.3408 0.6754 0.8416 0.1973 0.1539 Accuracy-focused CPGRec 0.2769 0.3341 0.2638 0.3953 0.7257 0.8834 0.2116 0.1642 Accuracy-focused CPGRec+ 0.2794 0.3368 0.2662 0.3989 0.7288 0.8871 0.2139 0.1658 

Diversity-driven Methods MMR 0.1878 0.2246 0.1763 0.2659 0.5831 0.7324 0.1581 0.1207 EDUA 0.2216 0.2673 0.2088 0.3124 0.6509 0.8172 0.1923 0.1506 DDGraph 0.2184 0.2619 0.2046 0.3065 0.6432 0.8058 0.1874 0.1469 DGCN 0.2247 0.2708 0.2113 0.3169 0.6561 0.8214 0.1948 0.1522 DGRec 0.2031 0.2492 0.1917 0.2863 0.6188 0.7783 0.1746 0.1341 Diversity-focused CPGRec 0.2486 0.2982 0.2354 0.3547 0.6917 0.8583 0.2039 0.1601 Diversity-focused CPGRec+ 0.2512 0.3013 0.2381 0.3586 0.6954 0.8621 0.2064 0.1613 

Balance-driven Methods EXPLORE 0.2352 0.2881 0.2239 0.3426 0.6723 0.8394 0.1981 0.1557 CPGRec (trade-off framework) 0.2819 0.3398 0.2688 0.4029 0.7319 0.8887 0.2148 0.1667 CPGRec+ (trade-off framework) 0.2844 0.3427 0.2709 0.4052 0.7349 0.8920 0.2162 0.1679 

An exhaustive comparison of CPGRec+ against various baseline models is detailed in Tables 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. The superior and runner-up outcomes are distinctively highlighted in bold and underlined text, respectively. Drawing from these experimental findings, we can distill the following insights: 

Manuscript submitted to ACM CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 29 

Table 7. Diversity-focus performance comparison of different accuracy-, diversity- and balance-driven recommender systems in terms of Conventional Coverage (CC), Coverage (C) and Entropy (E) on Steam I. 

Methods CC C(genre) C(developer) C(publisher) C(total) E(genre) E(developer) E(publisher) @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @ 10 Accuracy-driven Methods LightGCN 0.2373 0.2848 2.2839 3.2916 3.0915 5.1401 2.2818 4.3852 7.6572 12.8169 0.9409 0.9011 0.7030 1.4600 1.4820 1.2652 SURGE 0.2247 0.2718 1.4131 2.0649 3.0593 5.1238 2.0577 3.8481 7.2351 12.0368 0.8519 0.8184 0.6538 1.3815 1.3581 1.1949 BIGCF 0.2491 0.2908 2.3142 3.3611 3.1105 5.2582 2.3088 4.4951 7.7335 13.1144 0.9693 0.9317 0.7149 1.5217 1.4992 1.3038 MVGNN 0.2536 0.2949 2.4218 3.5381 3.1672 5.3991 2.3754 4.6942 7.9644 13.6314 0.9601 0.9255 0.7103 1.4892 1.5134 1.2916 SCGRec 0.2416 0.2785 2.3871 3.3754 3.1898 5.4122 2.3708 4.1812 7.9477 12.9688 0.9766 0.9118 0.7297 1.4773 1.5383 1.2802 Accuracy-focused CPGRec 0.2685 0.3188 2.7509 4.3680 3.1800 6.2738 2.5783 4.8981 8.5092 15.5399 1.0455 1.0926 0.7812 1.7702 1.6470 1.5340 

Accuracy-focused CPGRec+ 0.2757 0.3291 2.7491 4.3640 3.1768 6.2719 2.5674 4.8931 8.4933 15.5290 1.0404 1.0899 0.7692 1.7685 1.6431 1.5328 Diversity-driven Methods MMR 0.2719 0.3284 2.5928 3.8183 3.5418 5.4192 3.0945 4.8985 9.2291 14.1360 1.0783 1.0708 0.7778 1.7142 1.6190 1.4657 EDUA 0.2496 0.2925 2.1285 3.2491 3.2595 5.4325 2.3465 5.2056 7.7345 13.8872 0.9900 0.9821 0.7077 1.5624 1.4660 1.3385 DDGraph 0.2871 0.3033 2.3905 3.7699 3.0540 5.4324 2.6843 4.6402 8.1288 13.8425 0.9956 0.8848 0.8078 1.4931 1.5679 1.4212 DGCN 0.2602 0.3090 2.4069 4.2905 3.2863 5.8637 2.4981 3.9211 8.1913 14.0753 1.0133 1.0086 0.7301 1.5127 1.5708 1.3987 DGRec 0.2964 0.3047 2.5203 3.8800 3.6386 5.5896 2.6931 4.8046 8.8520 14.2742 1.0708 1.0633 0.7719 1.7013 1.6061 1.4549 Diversity-focused CPGRec 0.3173 0.3740 3.0929 4.7109 3.8044 6.9557 3.2404 5.9743 10.1377 17.6409 1.2602 1.1937 0.9054 2.1125 2.0886 1.6275 

Diversity-focused CPGRec+ 0.3252 0.3845 3.0915 4.6929 3.7941 6.9465 3.2352 5.9678 10.1208 17.6072 1.2571 1.1921 0.9009 2.1083 2.0848 1.6254 Balance-driven Methods EXPLORE 0.2952 0.3508 2.6180 4.2931 3.3212 5.9811 2.6833 5.2119 8.6225 15.4861 1.0622 1.1423 0.8942 1.4428 1.7854 1.5612 CPGRec (trade-off framework) 0.2963 0.3515 2.8635 4.5731 3.7032 6.8842 2.6864 5.2506 9.2530 16.7079 1.0971 1.1697 0.9070 1.8828 1.9418 1.6297 

CPGRec+ (trade-off framework) 0.3047 0.3611 2.7820 4.3553 3.6859 6.6449 2.7582 5.2616 9.2261 16.2618 1.0835 1.1873 1.0680 1.8666 1.9095 1.6171 

Table 8. Diversity-focus performance comparison of different accuracy-, diversity- and balance-driven recommender systems in terms of Conventional Coverage (CC), Coverage (C) and Entropy (E) on Steam II. 

Methods CC C(genre) C(developer) C(publisher) C(total) E(genre) E(developer) E(publisher) @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @10 @5 @ 10 Accuracy-driven Methods LightGCN 1.4659 1.9124 5.3448 6.7381 4.1693 8.4357 4.1226 7.9835 13.6367 23.1573 1.4708 1.5936 1.3781 2.0019 1.3673 1.9382 SURGE 1.4237 1.8649 5.2015 6.5728 4.0718 8.3013 4.0329 7.8446 13.3062 22.7187 1.4491 1.5642 1.3533 1.9678 1.3416 1.9085 BIGCF 1.4826 1.9531 5.4017 6.8092 4.2074 8.5146 4.1738 8.0772 13.7827 23.4010 1.4815 1.6094 1.3899 2.0248 1.3791 1.9537 MVGNN 1.4481 1.8973 5.2891 6.6834 4.1256 8.3819 4.0883 7.9241 13.5030 22.9894 1.4627 1.5815 1.3684 1.9892 1.3598 1.9258 SCGRec 1.4913 1.9688 5.4329 6.8415 4.2381 8.5773 4.2047 8.1349 13.8757 23.5537 1.4892 1.6183 1.3986 2.0351 1.3875 1.9664 Accuracy-focused CPGRec 1.5714 2.0581 5.8733 7.2498 4.5791 9.1206 4.5263 8.6141 14.9987 24.9845 1.5688 1.6993 1.4839 2.1482 1.4728 2.0799 

Accuracy-focused CPGRec+ 1.5752 2.0645 5.8698 7.2315 4.5824 9.1353 4.5317 8.6256 15.0211 25.0124 1.5706 1.7018 1.4801 2.1534 1.4759 2.0763 Diversity-driven Methods MMR 1.7351 2.2803 5.8691 7.3745 4.6527 9.1738 4.5019 8.7651 15.0237 25.3134 1.5642 1.7288 1.5026 2.1617 1.4664 2.1029 EDUA 1.7198 2.2581 5.8033 7.3016 4.6094 9.1025 4.4537 8.7039 14.8664 25.1080 1.5508 1.7134 1.4891 2.1462 1.4538 2.0887 DDGraph 1.7082 2.2436 5.7584 7.2583 4.5771 9.0496 4.4129 8.6572 14.7484 24.9651 1.5416 1.7027 1.4785 2.1331 1.4429 2.0754 DGCN 1.7486 2.2954 5.9127 7.4299 4.6839 9.2214 4.5388 8.8193 15.1354 25.4660 1.5739 1.7402 1.5118 2.1749 1.4751 2.1138 DGRec 1.7591 2.3082 5.9438 7.4613 4.7015 9.2588 4.5631 8.8527 15.2084 25.5810 1.5813 1.7486 1.5194 2.1853 1.4829 2.1245 Diversity-focused CPGRec 1.8803 2.4812 6.1794 7.8481 5.0638 9.9682 4.8714 9.4753 16.3015 27.5133 1.6572 1.8291 1.6193 2.3024 1.5908 2.2491 Diversity-focused CPGRec+ 1.8851 2.4878 6.1856 7.8542 5.0571 9.9759 4.8797 9.4828 16.2897 27.4989 1.6599 1.8324 1.6151 2.3077 1.5946 2.2562 

Balance-driven Methods EXPLORE 1.6904 2.2158 5.6923 7.1504 4.5018 8.8421 4.3791 8.4632 14.5732 24.4557 1.5187 1.6733 1.4562 2.0914 1.4206 2.0319 CPGRec (trade-off framework) 1.7749 2.3216 5.9994 7.5189 4.7381 9.3046 4.5892 8.8805 15.3108 25.6943 1.5921 1.7549 1.5298 2.1984 1.4941 2.1388 CPGRec+ (trade-off framework) 1.7725 2.3251 5.9863 7.5241 4.7458 9.2993 4.5937 8.8898 15.3259 25.7132 1.5948 1.7573 1.5264 2.2031 1.4916 2.1425 

Table 9. Diversity-focus performance comparison of different accuracy-, diversity- and balance-driven recommender systems in terms of Tail Coverage and Tail on Steam I. 

Method Tail Coverage Tail @5 @10 @5 @10 Accuracy-driven Methods LightGCN 0.1364 0.1626 0.0251 0.0036 SURGE 0.1383 0.1664 0.0248 0.0035 BIGCF 0.1421 0.1738 0.0263 0.0037 MVGNN 0.1402 0.1813 0.0257 0.0037 SCGRec 0.1346 0.1607 0.0250 0.0036 Accuracy-focused CPGRec 0.1458 0.2075 0.0279 0.0037 Accuracy-focused CPGRec+ 0.1495 0.2280 0.0280 0.0038 

Diversity-driven Methods MMR 0.1308 0.1607 0.0251 0.0036 EDUA 0.1346 0.1645 0.0250 0.0036 DDGraph 0.1364 0.1645 0.0250 0.0036 DGCN 0.1421 0.1645 0.0278 0.0037 DGRec 0.1402 0.2112 0.0283 0.0035 Diversity-focused CPGRec 0.1794 0.2561 0.0362 0.0051 Diversity-focused CPGRec+ 0.1869 0.2654 0.0375 0.0057 

Balance-driven Methods EXPLORE 0.1477 0.2243 0.0277 0.0036 CPGRec (trade-off framework) 0.1533 0.2336 0.0284 0.0038 CPGRec+ (trade-off framework) 0.1682 0.2617 0.0308 0.0047 

• Superiority of the Proposed Method w.r.t Accuracy or Diversity. (1) CPGRec+, in its accuracy-focused form, outperforms all other state-of-the-art accuracy-centric methods across all metrics. (2) Similarly, the diversity-focused CPGRec+ surpasses all diversity-centric approaches except for CPGRec, which serves as a variant of 

Manuscript submitted to ACM 30 Xiping Li et al. 

Table 10. Diversity-focus performance comparison of different accuracy-, diversity- and balance-driven recommender systems in terms of Tail Coverage and Tail on Steam II.                                                                          

> Method Tail Coverage Tail @5 @10 @5 @10 Accuracy-driven Methods LightGCN 0.3281 0.4214 0.1495 0.3188 SURGE 0.3315 0.4287 0.1489 0.3172 BIGCF 0.3402 0.4416 0.1517 0.3241 MVGNN 0.3378 0.4503 0.1506 0.3253 SCGRec 0.3259 0.4192 0.1491 0.3194 Accuracy-focused CPGRec 0.3501 0.4625 0.1583 0.3419 Accuracy-focused CPGRec+ 0.3507 0.4710 0.1610 0.3477
> Diversity-driven Methods MMR 0.3305 0.4311 0.1513 0.3204 EDUA 0.3348 0.4382 0.1511 0.3209 DDGraph 0.3371 0.4390 0.1512 0.3211 DGCN 0.3426 0.4401 0.1593 0.3284 DGRec 0.3411 0.4658 0.1612 0.3301 Diversity-focused CPGRec 0.3586 0.4791 0.1654 0.3562 Diversity-focused CPGRec+ 0.3607 0.4860 0.1703 0.3647
> Balance-driven Methods EXPLORE 0.3453 0.4618 0.1589 0.3345 CPGRec (trade-off framework) 0.3512 0.4693 0.1615 0.3497 CPGRec+ (trade-off framework) 0.3514 0.4766 0.1646 0.3538

CPGRec+ by removing the two newly proposed modules (both PER and PRG), on every metric. Moreover, when compared with CPGRec, CPGRec+ consistently outperforms CPGRec among long-tail-centric metrics like Con-ventional Coverage , Tail Coverage , and Tail due to its personal-preference-centeredness, which mitigates the dominance of popular games and fosters the long-tail game recommendations though slightly restricting the categorical diversity indicated by Coverage and Entropy . In essence, these results underscore CPGRec+’s superior performance in both accuracy and diversity. 

• Superiority of the Proposed Method w.r.t Capability of Flexible Adjusting. CPGRec+ along with CPGRec have outperformed the SOTA in the domains of accuracy, diversity, and balance, respectively. This demonstrates that the supposed dichotomy between accuracy and diversity is not inevitable. A well-calibrated recommender system like CPGRec+ can effectively harmonize these two aspects, precisely capturing user preferences while delivering a diverse selection that enriches the player experience. 

• Double-Edged Nature of Graph Convolutional Smoothness. (1) On one hand, effectively leveraging smooth-ness encodes category information into the representations of video games through graph structural transfor-mations, thereby enhancing accuracy. This strategy is evident in SCGRec and both the SGC and CNA modules of CPGRec+; (2) on the other hand, the smoothness resulting from stacking GCN layers reduces the distinc-tiveness of representations between neighboring games, which in turn affects the improvement of accuracy, as seen in diversity-driven baselines like DGRec. The stark contrast between the aforementioned two aspects is not surprising, as the latter’s design motivation is diversity rather than accuracy. On top of that, by comparing CPGRec+ and CPGRec, it is worth noting that our newly introduced modules (PER and PRG) not only show significant empowerment of accuracy, but also improve remarkedly the diversity illustrated by 

Conventional Coverage and the two long-tail-centric metrics Tail Coverage and Tail . Detailed analysis is deferred to the following ablation study presented in Section 7.4. 

7.4 Ablation Study 

Within this segment, we conduct an ablation analysis on CPGRec+ on Steam I by methodically removing each of its five modules. For the SGC module, we introduce two variants: one involves the complete removal of the SGC module, 

Manuscript submitted to ACM CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 31 while the other substitutes strict connections with raw ones. For the PER module, we nullify its effect by assigning a preference-informed weight of 0 to each edge within the player-game graph. Our observations from the experimental results, presented in Table 11, are as follows: 

• Effectiveness of Existing Four Modules. The observations from removing each of the existing four modules (SGC, CNA, PENR, and NSR), as presented in our conference work [41], are consistent with the results from that publication, so a redundant analysis is omitted here. However, it is important to note that these results not only validate the efficacy of the existing four modules but also confirm the compatibility of the newly introduced PER and PRG modules with them. 

• Effectiveness of PER Module w.r.t Accuracy. The removal of the PER module significantly degraded CP-GRec+’s performance across all accuracy metrics, underscoring PER’s pivotal role in tailoring recommendations to player interests. This indicates that PER effectively provides a granular modeling of a player’s preferences by contrasting the personal interest in each historical record with the global interests of the public. 

• Effectiveness of PRG Module w.r.t Accuracy. Similarly, removing PRG results in a significant decline in the accuracy of CPGRec+. This is expected, as the rich knowledge embedded in LLMs enables the generation of more comprehensive game descriptions beyond the dataset. Additionally, the reasoning capabilities of LLMs not only identify deep commonalities among games from multiple perspectives but also infer a player’s personal preferences, effectively constructing a more informative player profile. 

• Both PER and PRG Foster Balance-oriented Recommendations. Although the removals of the PER and PRG both result in a modest enhancement in Coverage@10 as well as a significant retrogression across the ac-curacy metrics relative to CPGRec+, which aligns with the anticipated trade-off between accuracy and diversity observed in numerous empirical studies [10, 29, 38, 56, 72]; moreover, it is worth noting that a marked reduction is evident in both the other two diversity metrics, i.e., Conventional Coverage and Tail. This finding highlights the critical role of comparing individual player preferences with public interests, which are employed in both PER and PRG: in terms of accuracy, the model gain deeper understanding of the players’ inherent interests by reasoning and comparing, which benefits more accurate recommendations; in terms of diversity, the model’s ability to reason about players’ inherent preferences allows it to better identify suitable long-tail games to be recommended, thereby enhancing long-tail recommendations. 

• PENR harmonizes different perspectives of diversity. Coverage (C), Conventional Coverage (CC), and Tail Coverage are three diversity metrics from different perspectives: C measures the breadth of categories covered by recommended games, while CC and Tail Coverage measure the number of games and long-tail games covered by the recommended lists, respectively. The essential incorporation of the Popularity-guided Edges and Nodes Reweighting (PENR) component effectively fosters a balance in CPGRec+’s performance across these three perspectives on diversity, emphasizing the crucial objective of long-tail recommendation in this study. PENR’s mechanism of reweighting the player-game graph amplifies the influence of long-tail games, which not only boosts Tail Coverage directly but also brings the cascading effect of implicitly diversifying the categories of top 5 recommended games measured by Coverage, while keeping the Conventional Coverage just a hair behind the suboptimal levels. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

32 Xiping Li et al. 

Table 11. Ablation study. We show CPGRec+’s performance when removing each of the modules.                                                                                                                   

> Method Recall@5 Recall@10 Hit@5 Hit@10 Precision@5 Precision@10 C(total)@5 C(total)@10 CC@5 CC@10 Tail Coverage@5 Tail Coverage@10
> CPGRec+ (trade-off framework) 0.5347 0.6192 0.6590 0.7473 0.1538 0.0967 9.2261 16.2618 0.3047 0.3611 0.1682 0.2617
> w/o SGC (1st accuracy-driven module) 0.5284 0.6114 0.6506 0.7404 0.1508 0.0947 9.7154 17.3755 0.3076 0.3654 0.1720 0.2542 CPGRec+ (SGC with raw connections) 0.5275 0.6114 0.6502 0.7407 0.1499 0.0941 8.4256 15.6349 0.2959 0.3490 0.1664 0.2449 w/o PER (2nd accuracy-driven module) 0.5277 0.6119 0.6498 0.7406 0.1501 0.0946 9.2041 16.7189 0.2924 0.3468 0.1607 0.2393 w/o PRG (3rd accuracy-driven module) 0.5252 0.6101 0.6481 0.7402 0.1498 0.0944 9.0745 16.5235 0.2895 0.3402 0.1589 0.2374 w/o CNA (1st diversity-driven module) 0.5311 0.6106 0.6545 0.7393 0.1518 0.0947 8.3133 14.3171 0.2799 0.3318 0.1551 0.2355 w/o PENR (2nd diversity-driven module) 0.5794 0.6376 0.7055 0.7629 0.1630 0.0989 8.7021 16.3384 0.3148 0.3765 0.1589 0.2393 w/o NSR (comprehensive module) 0.5131 0.6018 0.6333 0.7330 0.1491 0.0924 7.8537 13.2116 0.2832 0.3348 0.1570 0.2374

Fig. 6. Parameter sensitivity on 𝛼 , which is the significance level applied in PER module. 

7.5 Parameter Sensitivity 

In this section, we analyze the impact of the hyper-parameter 𝛼 in the PER module on Steam I. The parameter 𝛼 

represents the significance level and determines the operational scope of PER by setting the threshold 𝑄 𝛼 for the Fisher distribution-based sign decision. Specifically, a smaller 𝛼 indicates stricter conditions for applying preference-informed edge reweighting, requiring the player to demonstrate a more significant deviation from the global preference of general players. Conversely, a larger 𝛼 implies more lenient conditions. To evaluate the effectiveness of 𝛼 , we conducted experiments by varying its value within the range [0.001, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4] .For accuracy assessment, we utilized Recall@5 and Precision@5 ; for diversity evaluation, we employed Coverage@5 and 

Conventional Coverage@5 . The experimental results, presented in Fig. 6, demonstrate that 𝛼 significantly influences both accuracy and diversity, with optimal performance observed at moderate values of 𝛼 .For accuracy , the analysis reveals two distinct trends: (1) When 𝛼 is small (specifically, 𝛼 ∈ {0.001, 0.01, 0.05} ), both Recall and Precision increase as 𝛼 rises. Notably, a fairly small 𝛼 imposes strict conditions for using the PER module, similar to not applying it, while increasing 

𝛼 moderately broadens the scope for preference-informed weights. This underscores the critical role of 𝛼 in enhancing recommendation accuracy. (2) However, as 𝛼 grows larger ( 𝛼 ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4} ), both Recall and Precision decline. A larger 𝛼 makes PER’s conditions too lenient, including less reliable preferences, which adds noise and reduces accuracy. For diversity , the metrics Coverage and Conventional Coverage behave differently as 𝛼 changes: (1) As 𝛼 increases, Coverage first decreases, then rises. This differs from accuracy trends, showing a trade-off: wider-ranging recommendations can improve diversity but may lower accuracy. (2) Meanwhile, Conventional Coverage rises initially with 𝛼 , then slightly drops, similar to Recall and Precision . This occurs because the PER module uses dwelling time and game ratings to better model players and games, making recommendations more unique and globally diverse. 

Manuscript submitted to ACM CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 33 Input of CPGRec+ (Raw Features)    

> Spectral Energy Distribution
> Output of CPGRec+ (w/o PER )
> Spectral Energy Distribution Smoothness of Output Representations of CPGRec+ ( w/o PER )Output of CPGRec+ (w/ PER )Spectral Energy Distribution Smoothness of Output Representations of CPGRec+ ( w/ PER )
> Smoothness of Players’ and Games’ Raw Features
> Node Feature Node Feature Node Feature
> 210-1 -2 210-1 -2 210-1 -2
> 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0.0
> 0.45 0.3 0.15 0.0 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0.0 1.6 1.2 0.8 0.4 0.0 2.0 1.6 1.2 0.8 0.4 0.0 2.0
> 1.6 1.2 0.8 0.4 0.0 2.0
> 
> (,)(,)
> (,)

Fig. 7. Spectral energy distribution of node representations on the player-game game. The representations on the left figure is the raw feature of players and games, and those on the right are respectively processed by CPGRec+ w/o PER and w/ PER. 

7.6 Intuitive Understanding of the Functionality of PER 

In this section, we provide a detailed explanation to enhance understanding of the PER module’s role within CPGRec+. We use a subgraph from the player-game bipartite graph as an illustrative example. This subgraph consists of 50 nodes representing players or games, with edges denoting historical interactions. Each node is assigned a 1-dimensional sim-ulated feature. To demonstrate CPGRec+’s functionality, we compare it to a variant without the PER module, focusing on how each processes input features. Fig. 7 presents the subgraph details, including spectral energy distributions as a quantitative supplement. The spectral energy distribution is defined as: 

𝑓 𝐺 (Λ, 𝑋 ) = [𝑓 𝐺 (𝜆 1, 𝑋 ), 𝑓 𝐺 (𝜆 2, 𝑋 ), ⋯ , 𝑓 𝐺 (𝜆 𝒩 , 𝑋 )] (58) 

= [̃ 𝑥 𝑇 1̃ 𝑥 1

∑𝒩 

𝑖=1 ̃ 𝑥 𝑇 𝑖 ̃ 𝑥 𝑖 

,̃ 𝑥 𝑇 2̃ 𝑥 2

∑𝒩 

𝑖=1 ̃ 𝑥 𝑇 𝑖 ̃ 𝑥 𝑖 

, ⋯ ,̃ 𝑥 𝑇 

𝒩 ̃ 𝑥 𝒩 

∑𝒩 

𝑖=1 ̃ 𝑥 𝑇 𝑖 ̃ 𝑥 𝑖 

], (59) where ̃ 𝑥 𝑖 is the dot product of the 𝑖 -th normalized eigenvector 𝑢 𝑖 defined as Equation 63 and the nodes’ feature 𝑋 ∈ ℛ𝒩 .Smaller 𝜆 𝑖 values correspond to low-frequency components, and vice versa. The smoothness of 𝑋 is characterized by the spectral energy distribution’s emphasis on low-frequency parts: higher 𝑓 𝐺 (𝜆 𝑖 , 𝑋 ) values for smaller 𝜆 𝑖 indicate greater smoothness, while higher weights in mid to high frequencies suggest less smoothness. The left figure in Fig. 7 illustrates the raw feature smoothness, showing distinct node features with non-uniform colors. The spectral energy distribution suggests a significant distribution across low and mid frequencies. The right figures in Fig. 7 compare representations processed by CPGRec+ without and with the PER module, with observations as follows: (1) The first row shows that without the PER module, representations exhibit over-smoothness, as indicated by uniform node colors ( e.g. , red) and concentrated low-frequency spectral energy. This aligns with Section 5.3’s anal-ysis, where neglecting interaction disparities leads to over-smoothness due to graph convolutional layers’ inherent smoothness. 

Manuscript submitted to ACM 34 Xiping Li et al. (2) Conversely, the second row demonstrates that incorporating the PER module helps CPGRec+ avoid over-smoothness, evident from varied node colors. The spectral energy distribution retains high-frequency components, indicating that CPGRec+ captures preference-informed personal interest and disinterest, extending beyond a low-pass filter to address personalized player needs. 

7.7 Analysis of Fusion Methods 

As detailed in the introduction to the component PRG in Section 6.2, MLPs are leveraged to fuse the embedded repre-sentation of players and games generated by LLMs and the corresponding original representations to generate more informative final representations 𝑒 𝑢 and 𝑒 𝑖 , respectively. In this section, we meticulously compare the performance of the proposed model when combined with different fusion methods, including linear and gated fusion, to provide more complete analysis and insights. The experimental results from Steam I are presented in Table 12. As seen in Table 12, when combined with MLP, CPGRec+ significantly outperforms the other two variants with linear and gated fusion methods in terms of both accuracy and diversity across most cases, which justifies the choice of MLP as the default fusion method. Besides, based on the following two observations, the experimental results can be attrib-uted to the ability of different fusion methods to capture deep player preference information: (1) the MLP model has more learnable parameters and the ability to capture higher-order feature interactions than linear and gated fusion methods to fit the complex patterns of player-game interaction; (2) gated fusion significantly outperforms the linear fusion since it can not only adaptively adjust the weights of the original representation and the representation gen-erated by LLM, but also introduces a nonlinear control mechanism through the gated network, which has stronger expressive power than linear fusion.                                          

> Table 12. CPGRec+’s performance when it is combined with different fusion methods.
> Fusion Method Recall@5 Recall@10 Hit@5 Hit@10 Precision@5 Precision@10 C(total)@5 C(total)@10 CC@5 CC@10 MLP (default) 0.5347 0.6192 0.6590 0.7473 0.1538 0.0967 9.2261 16.2618 0.3047 0.3611
> Linear 0.5170 0.6023 0.6382 0.7316 0.1472 0.0928 8.8078 16.2777 0.2830 0.3372 Gated 0.5266 0.6080 0.6467 0.7361 0.1493 0.0936 8.9275 15.9849 0.2935 0.3540
> Table 13. Historical interactions of the player

𝑖 . Each game’s ID is marked after its name. A game may have multiple IDs representing different versions, e.g. , the official version and a free trial or promotional version. 

Division Historical Games Train Set Counter-Strike: Source (240), Day of Defeat: Source (300), Call of Duty®: Modern Warfare® 3 (42680, 42690) Valid Set Half-Life 2: Lost Coast (340) Test Set Half-Life 2: Deathmatch (320) 

7.8 Case Study on the Interplay between PER and PRG 

In this section, a detailed case study is provided to demonstrate and analyze the interplay between PER and PRG, the two components newly proposed in this study. Specifically, we compare and analyze the recommendation results of the 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 35   

> Table 14. Basic information of the player i’s historical games within the train set. Only the information of games within train set is shown since they are the only accessible information to foster CPGRec+’s deeper understanding of player i’s preferences.

Game ID 240 300 42680 42690 Average Rating 88 80 74 74 Dwelling Time 42 91,977 124 158 Mapped Rating 1.0232 0.0102 -0.7678 -0.7678 Mapped Time -0.8195 3.7610 -0.4717 -0.3849 Fisher Statistic 0.6415 136,960 0.3775 0.2514  

> Table 15. Experimental results of Top 10 Recommendations for the player i. The games within the list are organized in descending order of predicted probability. The target game is highlighted in bold.

Setting Top 10 Recommendations (a) CPGRec [42710, 42700, 730, 10090, 340, 202990, 55100, 57900, 58200, 23500] 

(b) CPGRec w/ PER [570, 20, 630, 320 , 40, 60, 730, 1520, 440, 202990] 

(c) CPGRec w/ PRG [340, 42700, 320 , 42710, 730, 7940, 12210, 380, 630, 60] 

(d) CPGRec+ (CPGRec w/ PER, PRG) [320 , 340, 440, 20, 630, 30, 570, 1520, 60, 42700] 

proposed framework for player i (Steam ID = 76561198037067087) on Steam I under four different settings: (a) CPGRec (i.e., CPGRec+ w/o PER and PER), (b) CPGRec w/ PER, (c) CPGRec w/ PRG, (d) CPGRec+ (i.e., CPGRec w/ PER and PRG). The historical games of player i, the basic information of these historical games, and the experimental results are shown in Tables 13, 14, and 15, respectively. Based on the experimental results shown in Table 15, we have the following key observations for each setting: 

• Regarding setting (a): two key observations are made. First, the target item (320) is absent from the recom-mendation list, reflecting the model’s limited capacity for providing accurate recommendations. Furthermore, the model ranks Call of Duty®: Black Ops (42710, 42700), Counter-Strike: Global Offensive (730), and Call of Duty: World at War (10090) at the top of the list. This occurs despite the demonstrably limited interest player i

has shown in other versions of these games (240, 42680, 42690), as evidenced by the dwelling time in Table 14. This illustrates that in the absence of PER, CPGRec itself lacks the ability to discern from historical interactions those that are more indicative of a player’s personalized interests and to learn from them preferentially. 

• Regarding setting (b): upon incorporating the PER component, the model acquires the ability to discern the disparity in importance among historical interactions, from which it benefits significantly. On the one hand, the model assigns greater attention to the interaction between player i and Day of Defeat: Source (300), as its corresponding Fisher statistic is statistically significant, leading to the precise recommendation of the target game (320). On the other hand, the model discerns that the player’s historical interactions with the other three games (240, 42680, 42690) are not significantly indicative of its interests, notwithstanding their presence in the historical data. Consequently, while alternative versions of these games (e.g., Counter-Strike: Global Offensive, 730; Call of Duty®: Black Ops II, 202990) are included in the recommendation list, they are assigned considerably lower ranks. Nevertheless, the model’s inability to place the target game (320) at the forefront of the recommen-dation list reveals a deficiency in its predictive precision, which is potentially due to an insufficient grasp of the 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

36 Xiping Li et al. inherent information pertaining to the games and players. This specific challenge prompted us to incorporate PRG. 

• Regarding setting (c): upon incorporating PRG, the model gains enhanced insights into all games and players, encoded in their respective representations. Leveraging this, the model ranks the target game (320) and a related version (340) in the top three positions. A persistent issue remains, however, as the model also assigns high ranks to versions of games (42700, 42710, 730) that held no significant interest for player i in the historical data (240, 42680, 42690). This suggests that the model is still unable to distinguish the relative importance of past interactions and remains susceptible to the over-smoothing problem inherent in bipartite graphs. It was this challenge that inspired the introduction of PER. 

• Regarding setting (d): under the interplay of PER and PRG, the model selectively focuses on the more critical historical interactions, leveraging its profound understanding of the games and player preferences to provide ideal recommendations. Specifically, the target game (320) and its variant (340) are ranked in the top two po-sitions, while a different version (42700) of games (42680, 42690) that proved to be less appealing to player i

is ranked last. In comparison to the player’s highly-favored Day of Defeat: Source (300), these recommended games not only feature a diverse range of settings and styles, including cartoon (20, 440), battlefield (320, 1520, 42700), space (630), and epic fantasy (570), but also maintain a consistent core gameplay. They all necessitate that players fulfill distinct roles within a class-based system, devise and execute sophisticated tactics, and engage in close coordination and teamwork. In summary, the PER and PRG interplay enables CPGRec+ to fully grasp the player’s preferences and provide accu-rate and rich recommendations. PER, through improved graph structure, enables CPGRec+ to focus more on historical interactions that significantly reflect individual interests. However, CPGRec+ achieves suboptimal performance with-out the informative representations provided by the PRG as input. Conversely, CPGRec+ without the PRG inevitably suffers from the dilemma of over-focusing on noisy historical interactions, also at the expense of reduced accuracy. 

8 Conclusion 

To address the accuracy-diversity trade-off in video game recommendation, we identify two key limitations in GCN-based models: oversmoothing, which homogenizes recommendations, and the neglect of interaction-level disparities, which weakens personalization. This motivates enhancements to our prior framework, CPGRec, resulting in CPGRec+. Motivated by these findings, we proposed CPGRec+ , which introduces two novel modules to address interaction disparities and balance competing objectives. The Preference-informed Edge Reweighting (PER) module leverages dwell time and ratings—transformed via Box-Cox and Fisher distribution linkages—to differentiate player interests and disinterests, mitigating over-smoothing by reweighting edges with information-theoretic confidence scores. Comple-menting this, the Preference-informed Representation Generation (PRG) module harnesses LLMs to synthesize game descriptions enriched by global ratings and infer personalized player preferences through comparative reasoning to generate player descriptions, refining embeddings with semantic insights. Experiments on real-world data demon-strated CPGRec+’s superiority: it achieves significantly better accuracy than state-of-the-art accuracy-focused models while maintaining diversity metrics comparable to specialized baselines. Ablation studies underscore the necessity of PER and PRG, with their removal causing significant accuracy drops and reduced global coverage. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 37 Future work will explore dynamic graph updates to handle evolving player preferences and cold-start scenarios. Furthermore, as player interests shift over time, ensuring the reliability of LLM-based reasoning becomes critical. In-tegrating robust uncertainty quantification mechanisms for self-evolving LLMs [104] could significantly enhance the trustworthiness of generated player profiles in such dynamic environments. Additionally, integrating LLMs for cross-modal game understanding could further bridge semantic gaps, advancing toward truly adaptive recommendation ecosystems. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 62202122, 62073272, and 62572361), the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant No. 2024A1515011949, the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant No. GXWD20231130110308001, JCYJ20250604145617023., and JCYJ20240813104843058, the Shenzhen Education Science ”14th Five-Year Plan” 2023 Annual Project on Artificial Intel-ligence Special Project under Grant No. rgzn23001, the Guangdong Province Higher Education Research and Reform Project under Grant No. YueJiaoGaoHan(2024) No.9 (1227), and the Guangdong Province General Colleges and Uni-versities Innovation Team Project under No. 2022KCXTD038. 

References 

[1] Kolmogorov An. 1933. Sulla determinazione empirica di una legge didistribuzione. Giorn Dell’inst Ital Degli Att 4 (1933), 89–91. [2] Vineeta Anand and Ashish Kumar Maurya. 2025. A survey on recommender systems using graph neural network. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 1 (2025), 1–49. [3] Syed Muhammad Anwar, Talha Shahzad, Zunaira Sattar, Rahma Khan, and Muhammad Majid. 2017. A game recommender system using collab-orative filtering (GAMBIT). In 2017 14th International Bhurban Conference on Applied Sciences and Technology (IBCAST) . 328–332. [4] Avi Arampatzis and Georgios Kalamatianos. 2017. Suggesting points-of-interest via content-based, collaborative, and hybrid fusion methods in mobile devices. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 36, 3 (2017), 1–28. [5] C. BharathiPriya, Akash Sreenivasu, and Sampath Kumar. 2021. Online Video Game Recommendation System Using Content And Collaborative Filtering Techniques. In 2021 International Conference on Advancements in Electrical, Electronics, Communication, Computing and Automation (ICAECA) . 1–7. [6] Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The use of MMR, diversity-based reranking for reordering documents and producing summaries. In 

Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval . 335–336. [7] Loïc Caroux. 2023. Presence in video games: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of game design choices. Applied Ergonomics 

107 (2023), 103936. [8] Jianxin Chang, Chen Gao, Yu Zheng, Yiqun Hui, Yanan Niu, Yang Song, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. 2021. Sequential Recommendation with Graph Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (Virtual Event, Canada) (SIGIR ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 378–387. doi:10.1145/3404835.3462968 [9] Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. 2024. Bge m3-embedding: Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03216 (2024). [10] Wei Chen, Yiqing Wu, Zhao Zhang, Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhongshi He, Ruobing Xie, and Feng Xia. 2024. FairGap: Fairness-Aware Recommendation via Generating Counterfactual Graph. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 42, 4, Article 94 (Feb. 2024), 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3638352 [11] Peizhe Cheng, Shuaiqiang Wang, Jun Ma, Jiankai Sun, and Hui Xiong. 2017. Learning to recommend accurate and diverse items. In Proceedings of the World Wide Web . 183–192. [12] Germán Cheuque, Jose Antonio Guzman Gomez, and Denis Parra. 2019. Recommender Systems for Online Video Game Platforms: the Case of STEAM. 763–771. [13] Byeongjin Choe, Taegwan Kang, and Kyomin Jung. 2021. Recommendation system with hierarchical recurrent neural network for long-term time series. IEEE access 9 (2021), 72033–72039. [14] Erica Coppolillo, Giuseppe Manco, and Aristides Gionis. 2024. Relevance meets diversity: A user-centric framework for knowledge exploration through recommendations. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 490–501. [15] Zhikang Dong, Xiulong Liu, Bin Chen, Pawel Polak, and Peng Zhang. 2024. Musechat: A conversational music recommendation system for videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 12775–12785. [16] Yingtong Dou, Zhiwei Liu, Li Sun, Yutong Deng, Hao Peng, and Philip S Yu. 2020. Enhancing graph neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on information & knowledge management . 315–324. Manuscript submitted to ACM 38 Xiping Li et al. 

[17] Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Simone Boglio, Paolo Cremonesi, and Dietmar Jannach. 2021. A troubling analysis of reproducibility and progress in recommender systems research. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 39, 2 (2021), 1–49. [18] Ronald Aylmer Fisher. 1924. On a distribution yielding the error functions of several well known statistics. In Proceedings International Mathe-matical Congress, Toronto , Vol. 2. 805–813. [19] Chen Gao, Chao Huang, Donghan Yu, Haohao Fu, Tzh-Heng Lin, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. 2022. Item Recommendation for Word-of-Mouth Scenario in Social E-Commerce. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 34, 6 (2022), 2798–2809. [20] Chen Gao, Tzu-Heng Lin, Nian Li, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. 2023. Cross-Platform Item Recommendation for Online Social E-Commerce. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 35, 2 (2023), 1351–1364. [21] Shen Gao, Jiabao Fang, Quan Tu, Zhitao Yao, Zhumin Chen, Pengjie Ren, and Zhaochun Ren. 2024. Generative news recommendation. In Proceed-ings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 . 3444–3453. [22] Yuan Gao, Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, Zhenguang Liu, Huamin Feng, and Yongdong Zhang. 2023. Addressing heterophily in graph anomaly detection: A perspective of graph spectrum. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 . 1528–1538. [23] Valerio La Gatta, Vincenzo Moscato, Mirko Pennone, Marco Postiglione, and Giancarlo Sperlí. 2023. Music Recommendation via Hypergraph Embedding. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 34, 10 (2023), 7887–7899. [24] William L. Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2018. Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs. arXiv:1706.02216 [cs.SI] [25] Han Han, Can Wang, Yunwei Zhao, Min Shu, Wenlei Wang, and Yong Min. 2022. SSLE: A framework for evaluating the “Filter Bubble” effect on the news aggregator and recommenders. World Wide Web 25, 3 (2022), 1169–1195. [26] Xiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Meng Wang. 2020. Lightgcn: Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information Retrieval .639–648. [27] Dennis M Hofmann, Peter M VanNostrand, Lei Ma, Huayi Zhang, Joshua C DeOliveira, Lei Cao, and Elke A Rundensteiner. 2025. Agree to Disagree: Robust Anomaly Detection with Noisy Labels. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 3, 1 (2025), 1–24. [28] Fasiha Ikram, Humera Farooq, et al. 2022. Multimedia Recommendation System for Video Game Based on High-Level Visual Semantic Features. 

Scientific Programming 2022 (2022). [29] Amin Javari and Mahdi Jalili. 2015. A probabilistic model to resolve diversity–accuracy challenge of recommendation systems. Knowledge and Information Systems 44 (2015), 609–627. [30] Nan Jiang, Zihao Hu, Jie Wen, Jiahui Zhao, Weihao Gu, Ziang Tu, Ximeng Liu, Yuanyuan Li, Jianfei Gong, and Fengtao Lin. 2023. NAH: neighbor-aware attention-based heterogeneous relation network model in E-commerce recommendation. World Wide Web (2023), 1–22. [31] Sichen Jin, Yijia Zhang, Xingwang Li, and Mingyu Lu. 2023. Heterogeneous Graph Convolutional Network for E-commerce Product Recommen-dation with Adaptive Denoising Training. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics (2023), 1–1. [32] Wang-Cheng Kang and Julian McAuley. 2018. Self-attentive sequential recommendation. In 2018 IEEE international conference on data mining (ICDM) . IEEE, 197–206. [33] Zafran Khan, Muhammad Ishfaq Hussain, Naima Iltaf, Joonmo Kim, and Moongu Jeon. 2021. Contextual recommender system for E-commerce applications. Applied Soft Computing 109 (2021), 107552. [34] Sein Kim, Hongseok Kang, Seungyoon Choi, Donghyun Kim, Minchul Yang, and Chanyoung Park. 2024. Large language models meet collaborative filtering: An efficient all-round llm-based recommender system. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . 1395–1406. [35] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. 2017. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks. arXiv:1609.02907 [cs.LG] [36] Silvia Knobloch-Westerwick and Axel Westerwick. 2023. Algorithmic personalization of source cues in the filter bubble: Self-esteem and self-construal impact information exposure. New Media & Society 25, 8 (2023), 2095–2117. [37] Suman Kulkarni, Sophia U David, Christopher W Lynn, and Dani S Bassett. 2024. Information content of note transitions in the music of JS Bach. 

Physical Review Research 6, 1 (2024), 013136. [38] Matevž Kunaver and Tomaž Požrl. 2017. Diversity in recommender systems–A survey. Knowledge-based systems 123 (2017), 154–162. [39] Valerio La Gatta, Vincenzo Moscato, Mirko Pennone, Marco Postiglione, and Giancarlo Sperlí. 2022. Music recommendation via hypergraph embedding. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2022). [40] Benjamin Lacker and Samuel F Way. 2024. Socially-motivated music recommendation. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media , Vol. 18. 879–890. [41] Xiping Li, Jianghong Ma, Kangzhe Liu, Shanshan Feng, Haijun Zhang, and Yutong Wang. 2024. Category-based and Popularity-guided Video Game Recommendation: A Balance-oriented Framework. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 (Singapore, Singapore) (WWW ’24) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3734–3744. doi:10.1145/3589334.3645573 [42] Paul Pu Liang, Amir Zadeh, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2022. Foundations and trends in multimodal machine learning: Principles, challenges, and open questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03430 (2022). [43] Yile Liang, Tieyun Qian, Qing Li, and Hongzhi Yin. 2021. Enhancing domain-level and user-level adaptivity in diversified recommendation. In 

Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . 747–756. [44] Jianghao Lin, Xinyi Dai, Yunjia Xi, Weiwen Liu, Bo Chen, Hao Zhang, Yong Liu, Chuhan Wu, Xiangyang Li, Chenxu Zhu, et al. 2025. How can recommender systems benefit from large language models: A survey. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025), 1–47. Manuscript submitted to ACM CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 39 

[45] Fan Liu, Yaqi Liu, Huilin Chen, Zhiyong Cheng, Liqiang Nie, and Mohan Kankanhalli. 2025. Understanding Before Recommendation: Semantic Aspect-Aware Review Exploitation via Large Language Models. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025), 1–26. [46] Peiyang Liu. 2024. Unsupervised corrupt data detection for text training. Expert Systems with Applications 248 (2024), 123335. [47] Peiyang Liu, Xi Wang, Ziqiang Cui, and Wei Ye. 2025. Queries Are Not Alone: Clustering Text Embeddings for Video Search. In The 48th Interna-tional ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2025) . Association for Computing Machinery, 874–883. [48] Peiyang Liu, Jinyu Yang, Lin Wang, Sen Wang, Yunlai Hao, and Huihui Bai. 2023. Retrieval-Based Unsupervised Noisy Label Detection on Text Data. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management . 4099–4104. [49] Ziyang Liu, Chaokun Wang, Shuwen Zheng, Cheng Wu, Kai Zheng, Yang Song, and Na Mou. 2025. Pone-GNN: Integrating Positive and Negative Feedback in Graph Neural Networks for Recommender Systems. ACM Transactions on Recommender Systems (2025). [50] Wenpeng Lu, Rongyao Wang, Shoujin Wang, Xueping Peng, Hao Wu, and Qian Zhang. 2022. Aspect-Driven User Preference and News Repre-sentation Learning for News Recommendation. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23, 12 (2022), 25297–25307. [51] Tianze Luo, Yong Liu, and Sinno Jialin Pan. 2024. Collaborative Sequential Recommendations via Multi-view GNN-transformers. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 42, 6, Article 141 (June 2024), 27 pages. doi:10.1145/3649436 [52] Lien Michiels, Jens Leysen, Annelien Smets, and Bart Goethals. 2022. What are filter bubbles really? A review of the conceptual and empirical work. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 30th ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization . 274–279. [53] Lucas Möller and Sebastian Padó. 2025. Explaining Neural News Recommendation with Attributions onto Reading Histories. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 16, 1 (2025), 1–25. [54] Vincenzo Moscato, Antonio Picariello, and Giancarlo Sperlí. 2021. An Emotional Recommender System for Music. IEEE Intelligent Systems 36, 5 (2021), 57–68. [55] Mark O’Neill, Elham Vaziripour, Justin Wu, and Daniel Zappala. 2016. Condensing steam: Distilling the diversity of gamer behavior. In Proceedings of the 2016 internet measurement conference . 81–95. [56] Kenny Peng, Manish Raghavan, Emma Pierson, Jon Kleinberg, and Nikhil Garg. 2024. Reconciling the accuracy-diversity trade-off in recommen-dations. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 . 1318–1329. [57] Yingtao Peng, Chen Gao, Yu Zhang, Tangpeng Dan, Xiaoyi Du, Hengliang Luo, Yong Li, and Xiaofeng Meng. 2025. Denoising alignment with large language model for recommendation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025), 1–35. [58] Javier Pérez-Marcos, Lucía Martín-Gómez, Diego M. Jiménez-Bravo, Vivian F. López, and María N. Moreno-García. 2020. Hybrid system for video game recommendation based on implicit ratings and social networks. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing 11, 11 (01 Nov 2020), 4525–4535. [59] Laure Prétet, Gaël Richard, Clément Souchier, and Geoffroy Peeters. 2023. Video-to-Music Recommendation Using Temporal Alignment of Segments. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 25 (2023), 2898–2911. [60] Hédi Razgallah, Michalis Vlachos, Ahmad Ajalloeian, Ninghao Liu, Johannes Schneider, and Alexis Steinmann. 2024. Using neural and graph neural recommender systems to overcome choice overload: evidence from a music education platform. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 

42, 4 (2024), 1–26. [61] Xubin Ren, Wei Wei, Lianghao Xia, Lixin Su, Suqi Cheng, Junfeng Wang, Dawei Yin, and Chao Huang. 2024. Representation learning with large language models for recommendation. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 . 3464–3475. [62] Steffen Rendle, Christoph Freudenthaler, Zeno Gantner, and Lars Schmidt-Thieme. 2012. BPR: Bayesian Personalized Ranking from Implicit Feedback. arXiv:1205.2618 [cs.IR] [63] Frank Rosenblatt. 1958. The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and organization in the brain. Psychological review 65, 6 (1958), 386. [64] Hiroyuki Sakai, Christian Freude, Thomas Auzinger, David Hahn, and Michael Wimmer. 2024. A Statistical Approach to Monte Carlo Denoising. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers . 1–11. [65] R. M. Sakia. 2018. The Box-Cox Transformation Technique: A Review. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series D: The Statistician 41, 2 (12 2018), 169–178. arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/jrsssd/article-pdf/41/2/169/49929242/jrsssd_41_2_169.pdf doi:10.2307/2348250 [66] Michail Salampasis, Alkiviadis Katsalis, Theodosios Siomos, Marina Delianidi, Dimitrios Tektonidis, Konstantinos Christantonis, Pantelis Ka-planoglou, Ifigeneia Karaveli, Chrysostomos Bourlis, and Konstantinos Diamantaras. 2023. A Flexible Session-Based Recommender System for e-Commerce. Applied Sciences 13, 5 (2023). [67] David Sánchez, Montserrat Batet, and Alexandre Viejo. 2012. Detecting sensitive information from textual documents: an information-theoretic approach. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Modeling Decisions for Artificial Intelligence (Catalonia, Spain) (MDAI’12) . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 173–184. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-34620-0_17 [68] Alexander Semenov, Maciej Rysz, Gaurav Pandey, and Guanglin Xu. 2022. Diversity in news recommendations using contextual bandits. Expert Systems with Applications 195 (2022), 116478. [69] Claude E Shannon. 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical journal 27, 3 (1948), 379–423. [70] Heng-Shiou Sheu, Zhixuan Chu, Daiqing Qi, and Sheng Li. 2022. Knowledge-Guided Article Embedding Refinement for Session-Based News Recommendation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 33, 12 (2022), 7921–7927. [71] Fengzhao Shi, Yanan Cao, Yanmin Shang, Yuchen Zhou, Chuan Zhou, and Jia Wu. 2022. H2-FDetector: A GNN-based Fraud Detector with Homophilic and Heterophilic Connections. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022 (Virtual Event, Lyon, France) (WWW ’22) . Association Manuscript submitted to ACM 40 Xiping Li et al. 

for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1486–1494. doi:10.1145/3485447.3512195 [72] Xiaoyu Shi, Quanliang Liu, Hong Xie, Di Wu, Bo Peng, MingSheng Shang, and Defu Lian. 2023. Relieving popularity bias in interactive recom-mendation: A diversity-novelty-aware reinforcement learning approach. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 42, 2 (2023), 1–30. [73] Zhu Sun, Chen Li, Yu Lei, Lu Zhang, Jie Zhang, and Shunpan Liang. 2022. Point-of-Interest Recommendation for Users-Businesses With Uncertain Check-ins. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 34, 12 (2022), 5925–5938. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2021.3060818 [74] Hao Tang, Guoshuai Zhao, Yujiao He, Yuxia Wu, and Xueming Qian. 2023. Ranking-based contrastive loss for recommendation systems. 

Knowledge-Based Systems 261 (2023), 110180. [75] Ghazaleh Haratinezhad Torbati, Anna Tigunova, Andrew Yates, and Gerhard Weikum. 2023. Recommendations by Concise User Profiles from Review Text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01314 (2023). [76] Douglas Zanatta Ulian, João Luiz Becker, Carla Bonato Marcolin, and Eusebio Scornavacca. 2021. Exploring the effects of different Clustering Methods on a News Recommender System. Expert Systems with Applications 183 (2021), 115341. [77] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [78] Dongjing Wang, Xin Zhang, Yao Wan, Dongjin Yu, Guandong Xu, and Shuiguang Deng. 2022. Modeling Sequential Listening Behaviors With Attentive Temporal Point Process for Next and Next New Music Recommendation. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 24 (2022), 4170–4182. [79] Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, Meng Wang, Fuli Feng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2019. Neural graph collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR . 165–174. [80] Tianjun Wei, Tommy W. S. Chow, and Jianghong Ma. 2024. FPSR+: Toward Robust, Efficient, and Scalable Collaborative Filtering With Partition-Aware Item Similarity Modeling. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 36, 12 (2024), 8283–8296. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2024.3418080 [81] Zhihao Wen and Yuan Fang. 2024. Prompt Tuning on Graph-Augmented Low-Resource Text Classification. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 36, 12 (2024), 9080–9095. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2024.3440068 [82] Michael Wolfowicz, David Weisburd, and Badi Hasisi. 2023. Examining the interactive effects of the filter bubble and the echo chamber on radicalization. Journal of Experimental Criminology 19, 1 (2023), 119–141. [83] Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Yongfeng Huang, and Xing Xie. 2023. Personalized news recommendation: Methods and challenges. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 41, 1 (2023), 1–50. [84] Yunjia Xi, Weiwen Liu, Jianghao Lin, Xiaoling Cai, Hong Zhu, Jieming Zhu, Bo Chen, Ruiming Tang, Weinan Zhang, and Yong Yu. 2024. To-wards open-world recommendation with knowledge augmentation from large language models. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems . 12–22. [85] Kun Xie, Xiangyu Dong, Yusong Zhang, Xingyi Zhang, Qintian Guo, and Sibo Wang. 2024. Learning-Based Attribute-Augmented Proximity Matrix Factorization for Attributed Network Embedding. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 36, 11 (2024), 6517–6531. doi:10. 1109/TKDE.2024.3385847 [86] Lixiang Xu, Yusheng Liu, Tong Xu, Enhong Chen, and Yuanyan Tang. 2025. Graph augmentation empowered contrastive learning for recommen-dation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025), 1–27. [87] Feng Xue, Xiangnan He, Xiang Wang, Jiandong Xu, Kai Liu, and Richang Hong. 2019. Deep Item-based Collaborative Filtering for Top-N Recom-mendation. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 37, 3, Article 33 (April 2019), 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3314578 [88] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. 2024. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 (2024). [89] Liangwei Yang, Zhiwei Liu, Yu Wang, Chen Wang, Ziwei Fan, and Philip S. Yu. 2022. Large-scale Personalized Video Game Recommendation via Social-aware Contextualized Graph Neural Network. In Proceedings of the Web Conference .[90] Liangwei Yang, Shengjie Wang, Yunzhe Tao, Jiankai Sun, Xiaolong Liu, Philip S. Yu, and Taiqing Wang. 2023. DGRec: Graph Neural Network for Recommendation with Diversified Embedding Generation. In Proceedings of the WSDM .[91] Rui Ye, Yuqing Hou, Te Lei, Yunxing Zhang, Qing Zhang, Jiale Guo, Huaiwen Wu, and Hengliang Luo. 2021. Dynamic Graph Construction for Improving Diversity of Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems . 651–655. [92] Jing Yi, Yaochen Zhu, Jiayi Xie, and Zhenzhong Chen. 2023. Cross-Modal Variational Auto-Encoder for Content-Based Micro-Video Background Music Recommendation. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 25 (2023), 515–528. [93] Qing Yin, Hui Fang, Zhu Sun, and Yew-Soon Ong. 2023. Understanding Diversity in Session-based Recommendation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 42, 1 (aug 2023), 1–34. [94] Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. 2018. Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD . 974–983. [95] Chengde Zhang, Zihan Zhang, Jiaying Huang, Yan Liu, Dawei Jin, Xia Xiao, and Zuwu Shen. 2025. MKCRec: Meta-relation guided Knowledge Coupling for Paper Recommendation. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (2025). [96] Dan Zhang, Shaojie Zheng, Yifan Zhu, Huihui Yuan, Jibing Gong, and Jie Tang. 2025. MCAP: Low-Pass GNNs with Matrix Completion for Academic Recommendations. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025), 1–29. [97] Junjie Zhang, Ruobing Xie, Yupeng Hou, Xin Zhao, Leyu Lin, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. Recommendation as instruction following: A large language model empowered recommendation approach. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (2023). Manuscript submitted to ACM CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 41 

[98] Mingwei Zhang, Guiping Wang, Lanlan Ren, Jianxin Li, Ke Deng, and Bin Zhang. 2022. METoNR: A meta explanation triplet oriented news recommendation model. Knowledge-Based Systems 238 (2022), 107922. [99] Shengjia Zhang, Mingrui Yin, Fuyuan Xiao, Zehong Cao, and Danilo Pelusi. 2024. A complex Gaussian fuzzy numbers-based multisource infor-mation fusion for pattern classification. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems (2024). [100] Yang Zhang, Fuli Feng, Jizhi Zhang, Keqin Bao, Qifan Wang, and Xiangnan He. 2025. Collm: Integrating collaborative embeddings into large language models for recommendation. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2025). [101] Yi Zhang, Lei Sang, and Yiwen Zhang. 2024. Exploring the Individuality and Collectivity of Intents behind Interactions for Graph Collaborative Filtering. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (Washington DC, USA) (SIGIR ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1253–1262. doi:10.1145/3626772.3657738 [102] Zeyu Zhang, Shuguo Pan, Wang Gao, Chengfei Wang, Xianlu Tao, and Hao Liu. 2024. Anomalous ambiguity detection between reference stations based on Box-Cox transformation of tropospheric residual estimation. GPS Solutions 28, 4 (2024), 193. [103] Yu Zheng, Chen Gao, Liang Chen, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. 2021. DGCN: Diversified Recommendation with Graph Convolutional Networks. In 

Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 . ACM. [104] Xiaofan Zhou and Lu Cheng. 2025. Robust Uncertainty Quantification for Self-Evolving Large Language Models via Continual Domain Pretraining. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22931 (2025). [105] Cai-Nicolas Ziegler, Sean M. McNee, Joseph A. Konstan, and Georg Lausen. 2005. Improving Recommendation Lists through Topic Diversification. In Proceddings of the World Wide Web 2005 . 22–32. [106] Jie Zou, Aixin Sun, Cheng Long, and Evangelos Kanoulas. 2024. Knowledge-Enhanced Conversational Recommendation via Transformer-Based Sequential Modeling. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 42, 6 (2024), 1–27. 

A Introduction to Smoothness from a Spectral Perspective 

From a spectral perspective, a graph learning task can be viewed as a graph signal processing task, where Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) act as filters. Given a specific homogeneous graph 𝒢 with 𝒩 nodes, denoted as 𝒱 = {𝑣 1, 𝑣 2, … , 𝑣 𝒩 },whose edges are represented by an adjacency matrix 𝐴 = [𝑎 𝑖𝑗 ]𝒩 ×𝒩 , where 

𝑎 𝑖𝑗 = { 1 if there is an edge between 𝑣 𝑖 and 𝑣 𝑗 ,0 otherwise, (60) these nodes are characterized by 𝑑 features, represented as 𝒳 = [𝑋 1, 𝑋 2, … , 𝑋 𝑑 ] ∈ ℝ𝒩 ×𝑑 . Each column 𝑋 𝑗 =[𝑥 𝑗1 , 𝑥 𝑗2 , … , 𝑥 𝑗 𝒩 ]𝑇 , for 𝑗 ∈ {1, 2, … , 𝑑} , constitutes a graph signal defined on 𝒢 , with 𝑥 𝑗𝑖 ∈ ℝ denoting the 𝑗 -th fea-ture value of node 𝑣 𝑖 .The Laplacian matrix 𝐿 is a fundamental element in analyzing graph structures and is defined as: 

𝐿 = 𝐷 − 𝐴, (61) where 𝐷 is the diagonal degree matrix with 𝐷 𝑖𝑖 = ∑ 𝒩 

𝑗=1 𝐴 𝑖𝑗 . Being real and symmetric, 𝐿 admits an orthogonal diago-nalization: 

𝐿 = 𝒰 Λ𝒰 𝑇 = 𝒰 

⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣𝜆 1

𝜆 2

⋱𝜆 𝒩 

⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

𝒰 𝑇 , (62) where {𝜆 𝑖 }𝒩 

𝑖=1 are the eigenvalues of 𝐿 , satisfying 𝜆 1 ≤ 𝜆 2 ≤ ⋯ ≤ 𝜆 𝒩 , and 

𝒰 = [𝑢 1, 𝑢 2, … , 𝑢 𝒩 ] (63) is the matrix whose columns are the normalized eigenvectors of 𝐿 .

Manuscript submitted to ACM 42 Xiping Li et al. Eigenvalues carry rich semantic information, bridging the spectral and spatial domains. Specifically, eigenvectors corresponding to small eigenvalues represent low-frequency components of the graph signal, meaning the signal varies slowly across the graph, which results in neighboring nodes having similar feature values, thus indicating greater smoothness. Based on these definitions, the general formulation of a GNN is given by: 

𝑥 out = 𝒰 𝑓 (Λ) 𝒰 𝑇 𝑥 in , (64) where 𝑥 in and 𝑥 out denote the input and output graph signals, respectively. The function 𝑓 (Λ) represents the GNN’s frequency response function, serving as the convolutional kernel. By designing different 𝑓 (Λ) , researchers develop various GNN-based models tailored to specific tasks. For instance, in the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN), a widely used GNN model, the frequency response func-tion is defined as: 

𝑓 (Λ) = 𝜃(𝐼 − Λ), (65) which simplifies to 𝑓 (Λ) = 𝐼 −Λ when 𝜃 = 1 . This formulation highlights the low-pass nature of GCNs, as the kernel am-plifies low-frequency signals while suppressing high-frequency ones. Since emphasizing low-frequency components in the spectral domain increases the similarity of feature representations between neighboring nodes in the spatial domain, this accounts for the smoothness property observed in GCNs. 

B Prompts for Generating Descriptions 

This section provides two examples, which show how to generate descriptions for a game and a player, respectively. Specifically, Fig. 8 shows the process of generating a description for the game Ducati World Championship , whose average rating on the scale 100 is 35. Both Game Instruction and Game Prompt are input to the LLMs, which accordingly outputs the Game Description for Ducati World Championship . Fig. 9 shows how to generate a description for a player who has played three games whose ID=40, 79, and 456, respectively. Similarly, both Player Instruction 

and Player Prompt are input to the LLMs, which outputs Player Description .

> Received 23 March 2025; revised 29 August 2025; accepted 29 December 2025
> Manuscript submitted to ACM

CPGRec+: A Balance-oriented Framework for Personalized Video Game Recommendations 43 You will serve as an assistant with rich knowledge about the video games released on Steam platform, who are required to provide a description possessing the most key information for each video game. I will provide you with the title of video game, as well as the average rating by players on it. 

Here are some instructions: 

1. The provided information of video game is in the form of a JSON string that contains its title and average rating: {"title": "the title of the video game", "average rating ": "the average rating (100-scale) of historical players on the video game", "supplementary information": "supplementary information of the video game, including its price(US dollar) and released time(Year-Month-Day), (price=0 indicates this game is free)} 

Requirements: 

1. Please provide your answer in a JSON format, following this structure: 

{"description": "the most valuable information as a description for the video game, taking both its inherent information and the plays" 

average rating on it as important factors into consideration", "reasoning ": "briefly explain your reasoning for the description taking average rating into account"} 2. Please ensure that the "description" is no longer than 500 words. 3. You are not required to include the information about the developer, publisher, price and released time into the description. 4. Please ensure that the "reasoning" is no longer than 200 words. 5. Please do not provide any text within your answer in any form out of JSON string. 

6. Your answer must be in English. 

7. If the title of video game is null, just leave each term of your answer "None" Game Instruction 

{"title": "Ducati World Championship", "average rating ": "35", "supplementary information": "its price is 4.99 dollars and released time is 2007-09-21"} Game Prompt 

LLMs {"description": "Ducati World Championship is a motorcycle racing simulation game released in 2007. Players can experience the thrill of racing with Ducati motorcycles in various tracks. However, it has received mixed reviews from players, with an average rating of 35 out of 

100, indicating that it may not fully meet the expectations of all players.", 

"reasoning ": "The game's average rating of 35 suggests that it has some issues that players find unsatisfactory, such as gameplay mechanics, graphics, or overall experience. Despite its historical significance and the excitement of motorcycle racing, the low rating implies that players may face challenges or disappointments while playing.”} Game Description 

Fig. 8. An example of generating a game description. Player Instruction 

LLMs 

Player Description 

You will serve as an assistant to profile a player’s personal interest based on meticulous comparison between his or her personal interest and global interest , and your rich knowledge about the video games. I will provide you 

with the historical gaming records of each player along with his or her personal interest for each according game and the global interest, which represents the interest of general players. 

Here are some instructions: 1. The provided information of this player is in the form of a JSON string: {"information of historical games": "the historical gaming records of a player"}, 2. To be more detailed, the aforementioned historical records of a player is in the form of a JSON string: {"historical game i": {"description": "description for game i", "reasoning": "explanation for the generation of description for game i", "personal interest ": "a float number represents the personal interest of this player for game i, which follows the standard normal distribution", (A higher value indicates a greater degree of personal interest)." "global interest ": "a float number represents the global interest of general players for game i, which follows the standard normal distribution", (A higher value indicates a greater degree of personal interest)."} {"historical game j": {... (which is the same as the aforementioned case of game i)}}, ...(Similarly, all the video games played by this player will be included)} Requirements: 1. Please provide your answer in a JSON format, following this structure: {"description": "the most valuable description for this player based on meticulous comparison between his or her personal interest and global interest along with your knowledge about the historical video games", "reasoning ": "briefly explain your reasoning for the description, taking the meticulous person-globality comparison as the most important factor"} 

2. Please ensure that the "description" is no longer than 200 words. 

3. Please ensure that the "reasoning" is no longer than 100 words. 4. Please do not provide any text within your answer in any form out of JSON string. 5. Your answer must be in English. 6. As for the comparison between this player’s personal interest and the general players’ global interest: A personal interest significantly larger than global interest well reflects this particular player’s personal interest, while one smaller than global interest obviously shows his or her disinterest. The knowledge of historical games that this player has shown a significant personal interest in serves as more crucial information for the profiling of this player, in contrast, the information of games played that this player has shown witnessed disinterest also effectively reflects the personal preference of this player from an opposite side. 

{"description": "This player exhibits a strong personal interest in first-person shooter games, particularly those with a focus on teamwork, strategy, and customization. Team Fortress 2, with its vibrant characters and humorous dialogue, resonates well with the player's preferences, as evidenced by a personal interest score of 2.1, which is higher than the global interest score of 1.6. The player also shows a keen interest in games like Loadout, which offers a blend of strategy and action, with a personal interest score of 0.3, despite a lower global interest score of -0.9.", "reasoning ": "The player's personal interest in Team Fortress 2 and Loadout, both first-person shooter games with elements of teamwork, strategy, and customization, supports the observation that the player prefers this genre. The higher personal interest compared to global interest suggests a strong individual preference for these types of games."} 

Player Prompt 

Fig. 9. An example of generating a player description. 

Manuscript submitted to ACM